Trusted Product Evaluation Questionnaire



                       National Computer Security Center
                               9800 Savage Road
                      Fort George G. Meade, MD 20755-6000





                                  May 2,1992

                                                                   NCSC-TG-019
                                                            Library No. 5-232,458

                                                                       Version 2


                                   FOREWORD
The National Computer Security Center is publishing the Trusted Product Evaluation Ques-
tionnaire as part of the "Rainbow Series" of documents our Technical Guidelines Program
produces. In the Rainbow Series, we discuss in detail the features of the Department of
Defense Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (DoD 5200.28-STD) and provide
guidance for meeting each requirement. The National Computer Security Center, through
its Trusted Product Evaluation Program, evaluates the security features of commercially-
produced computer systems. Together, these programs ensure that organizations are capable
of protecting their important data with trusted computer systems.

The Trusted Product Evaluation Questionnaire is a tool to assist system developers and
vendors in gathering data to assist evaluators and potentially certifiers in their assessment
of the system.

As the Director, National Computer Security Center, I invite your recommendations for
revision to this technical guideline. We plan to review and update this document periodically
in response to the needs of the community. Please address any proposals for revision through
appropriate channels to:

  National Computer Security Center
  9800 Savage Road
  Ft. George G. Meade, MD 20755-6000

  Attention: Chief, S~andards, Criteria, and Guidelines Division








Patrick R. G   g     .                                                 May 1992
Director
National Computer Security Center

                               AcKNowLEDGMEN~i~S

The National Computer Security Center expresses appreciation to Dr. Santosh Chokhani
and Harriet Goldman, of the MITRE Corporation, as the principal authors of version I of this
document; Mr. Kenneth B. Elliott III and Dr. Dixie Baker, of The Aerospace Corporation,
as the principal authors of version 2 this document; and ENS Susan L. Mitchell as project
manager.

We also thank the evaluators, vendors, and users in the United States computer security
community who contributed their time and expertise to the review of this document.

































                                      ii

Contents

1 INTRODUCTION                                                                  1

  1.1    PURPOSE                                                                2

  1.2    SCOPE                                                                  2

2 QUESTIONNAIRE                                                                 4

  2.1   SUBJECTS                                                                4

  2.2   OBJECTS                                                                 6

  2.3   HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE                                                   7

  2.4   SOFTWARE                                                                9

  2.5   DISCRETIONARY ACCESS CONTROL                                           11

  2.6   IDENTIFICATION & AUTHENTICATION                                        13

  2.7   OBJECT REUSE                                                           14

  2.8   AUDIT                                                                  15

  2.9   LABELS                                                                 18

  2.10  MANDATORY ACCESS CONTROL                                               20

  2.11  TESTING                                                                21

  2.12  MODELING AND ANALYSIS                                                  23

  2.13  OTHER ASSURANCES                                                       25

  2.14   OTHER DOCUMENTATION                                                   27
                                      iii

3  GL0SSARY                                                                    29

4 REFERENCES                                                                   36









































                                      iv

Chapter 1

INTRODUCTION

One of the principal goals of the National Computer Security Center (NCSC) is to encourage
the widespread availability of trusted computer systems. In support of this goal a metric was
created, the Department of Defense Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC),
against which computer systems could be evaluated. The TCSEC was originally published
on 15 August 1983 as CSC-STD-001-83. In December 1985 the DoD adopted it, with a few
changes, as a DoD Standard, DoD 5200.28-STD. DoD Directive 5200.28, "Security Require-
ments for Automatic Information Systems (AISs)," has been written to require, among other
things, the Department of Defense Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria to be used
throughout the DoD. The TCSEC is the standard used for evaluating the effectiveness of
security controls built into ADP systems. The TCSEC is divided into four divisions: D,
C, B, and A, ordered in a hierarchical manner with the highest division (A) being reserved
for systems providing the best available level of assurance. Within divisions C, B, and A
there are subdivisions known as classes, which are also ordered in a hierarchical manner to
represent different levels of security in these classes.

The National Security Agency (NSA) has established an aggressive program to study and
implement computer security technology and to encourage the widespread availability of
trusted computer products for use by any organization desiring better protection of their
important data and information processing services. The Trusted Prodii~tt Evaluation Pro-
gram and the open and cooperative business relationship being forged with the computer
and telecommunications industries will result in the fulfillment of our country's computer
security requirement. We are resolved to meet the challenge of identifying trusted computer
products suitable for use in processing all types and classifications of information.

For definition and clarification of tile terms used in this document, please see the glossary
section of this questionnaire.

Sub-questions within the numbered questions have been designated with letters (e.g., (a),
(b), ...) so that answers to all parts of the main question can be identified.

Review of this document will occur periodically or when the need arises. Address all pro-
posals for revision through appropriate channels to:
            National Computer Security Center
            9800 Savage Road
            Fort George G. Meade, MD 20755-6000

            Attention: Chief, Standards, Criteria, and Guidelines Division


1.1      PURPOSE
The NSA is responsible for evaluating commercial products through an independent evalua-
tion based on TCSEC requirements by a qualified team of experts and maintaining a list of
those products on the Evaluated Products List (EPL). To accomplish this mission, the NSA
Trusted Product Evaluation Program has been established to assist vendors in developing,
testing, and evaluating trusted products for the EPL.
During the evaluation process, the TCSEC for classes C1 through Al requires a determi-
nation that the security features of a system are implemented as designed and that they
are adequate for the specified level of trust. In addition, the TCSEC also requires doc-
umentation to support a system's security. During the various phases of the evaluation
process, the vendor supplies to an evaluation team certain information on system security
and documentation. The purpose of the Trusted Product Evaluation Questionnaire (prod-
uct questionnaire) is to assist system developers and vendors as a data gathering tool for
formalizing the data gathering process for the various phases of the Trusted Products Evalu-
ation process. Additionally, the product questionnaire may be used as a data gathering tool
to assist certifiers in the evaluation process for certification and accreditation if the Final
Evaluation Report is unavailable.
Examples in this document are not to be construed as the only implementations that may
answer the question. The examples are suggestions of appropriate implementations. The rec-
ommendations in this document are also not to be construed as supplementary requirements
to the questionnaire.


1.2      SCOPE
The product questionnaire addresses the TCSEC Criteria Classes C1 through Al. In an
effort to gather a better understanding of the system sec~jrity, some questions in the product
questionnaire address information in addition to that required in the Department of Defense
Trusted Computer Systems Evaluation Criteria. This document is generally organized by
                                       2

Criteria subject area; within each subject area, the questions are broken down in a manner
similar to Appendix D of the Criteria. This breakdown readily allows the reader to discern
the questions that are appropriate to each of the Criteria levels. Of course, all of the questions
at levels lower than the target level are applicable.

The information provided in the product questionnaire by the vendor is to assist the evaluator
in obtaining an initial understanding of the system applying for evaluation and its security
features of the respective Criteria class. The product questionnaire is not a statement of
requirements, just an information gathering tool. This document should give the vendor
an idea of the information required by the evaluator during the evaluation process and
prepare the vendor for additional information needed by the evaluation team later on in the
evaluation process.

The product questionnaire will be initially sent out to the vendor prior to the Preliminary
Technical Review (PTR). The vendor can point to appropriate documents for the answers.
The vendor need not answer the questions that are not pertinent. Some of the questions
may be applicable at the later stages of the evaluation process and thus may be deferred
until the appropriate time (e.g., a finished copy of the Verification Plan). Although the
vendor is not obligated to send a completed product questionnaire prior to the PTR, the
vendor should have the questionnaire substantially completed by the PTR date so that the
PTR team can use the Questionnaire as in input into determining the vendor's ability to
support an evaluation. The PTR team will also use the product questionnaire during the
PTR to seek additional information to be used later on in the evaluation process. When an
evaluation team has reached the Design Analysis Phase and is preparing the Initial Product
Assessment Report, it will use the product questionnaire to seek specific references in vendor
documentation for further details on the answers to these questions.

The completed document is to provide the evaluator an understanding of the various hard-
ware and software configurations, architecture and design, testing, and documentation, sys-
tem security features and their applicability to security and accountability policy, Trusted
Computing Base (TCB) isolation and non-circumventability, and covert channel analysis
methods. This product questionnaire also requests information on penetration testing and
specification-to-code correspondence for systems to which these requirements are applicable.

While this product questionnaire is designed for operating systems and dbes not specifically
address networks, subsystems, or database management systems, vendors participating in
these areas may find it useful to review this document and answer any applicable questions.







                                       3

Chapter 2

QUESTIONNAIRE

2.1      SUBJECTS
A subject is an active entity in the system, generally in the form of a person, process, or
device that causes information to flow among objects or changes the system state. A subject
can be viewed as a process/domain pair whose access controls are checked prior to granting
the access to objects.
CI:


  1. (a) List and (b) describe the subjects in your system.
  2. (a) When and (b) how are the subjects created? (For example, they can be created or
     activated when a user logs on or when a process is spawned.)
  3. (a) When and (b) how are the subjects destroyed? (For example, they can be destroyed
     or deactivated when a process terminates or when the user logs off.)
  4. (a) What are the security attributes of a subject? (Examples of security attributes are
     user name, group id, sensitivity level, etc.) For each type of subject in your system
     (e.g., user, process, device), what mechanisms are available to (b) define and (c) modify
     these attributes? (d) Who can invoke these mechanisms?
  5. (a) What are other security-relevant privileges a subject can have? (Examples of such
     privileges are: super user, system operator, system administrator, etc. Your operating
     system may assign numerous other privileges to the subjects, such as the ability to
     use certain devices.) For each type of subject in your system, what mechanisms are
     available to (b) define and (c) modify these pnv)leges? (d) Who can invoke these
     mechanisms? (e) Provide a list of subjects within the TCB boundary and (f) the list
     of privileges for each of them.
                                       4

6. When a subject is created, where do its (a) security attributes and (b) privileges
  originate; i.e., how are the security attributes and privileges inherited?
7. List the subjects, if any, which are not controlled by the TCB.







































                                       5

2.2     OBJECTS
An object is a passive entity that contains or receives information. Access to an object
potentially implies access to the information it contains. Examples of objects are: records,
blocks, pages, segments, files, directories, directory tree, and programs, as well as bits, bytes,
words, fields, processors, video displays, keyboards, clocks, printers, network nodes.
CI:

  1. Provide a list of objects within the TCB (e.g., authentication database, print queues).
  2. List the objects in your system that are protected by the Discretionary Access Control
     (DAC) mechanisms.
  3. (a) List the objects that are not protected by the DAC mechanism. (b) Why are they
     not protected? (c) Describe other mechanisms used to isolate and protect objects.
  4. (a) List other resources which are not protected by the DAC mechanism (Examples
     include temporary data files accessible only to the file's owner). (b) Why are they not
     protected by DAC? (c) Describe the mechanisms that are used to isolate and protect
     these resources.
  5. How are the various types of objects created (e.g., directories, files, devices)?
  6. How are the various types of objects destroyed?
  7. (a) What are the security attributes of an object? For each type of object in your
     system, what mechanisms are available to (b) define and (c) modify these attributes?
     (d) Who can invoke these mechanisms?
  8. When an object i$ created, where do its security attributes originate (i.e., how are the
     security attributes inherited?)

BI:

  9. List the objects in your system that are protected by the Mandatory Access Control
     (MAC) mechanisms.
  10. (a) List the objects that are not protected by the MAC mechanism. (b) Why are they
     not protected? (c) Describe other mechanisms used to isolate and protect objects.
  11. (a) List other resources which are not protected by the MAC mechanism. (b) Why are
     they not protected? (c) Describe the mechanisms that are used to isolate and protect
     these resources.
                                       6

2.3     HARDWARE ARcHITEcTUR~
If this evaluation is for a family of hardware, the following questions should be answered
for each member of the hardware family. You may choose to answer each question for each
member of the family, or answer each question for a baseline family member and point out
the difference for each of the remaining family members.

CI:

  1. Provide a high-level block diagram of the system. The diagram should at least depict
     various Central Processor Units (CPUs), memory controllers, memory, 1/0 processors,
     1/0 controllers, 1/0 devices (e.g. printers, displays, disks, tapes, communications
     lines) and relationships (both control flow and data flow) among them.

  2. (a) Describe the portions of the system (if any) which contain microcode. (b) How is
     this microcode protected and loaded?

  3. (a) Provide a list of privileged instructions for your hardware. (b) Provide a brief
     description of each privileged instruction.

  4. For each privileged instruction, provide the privileges required to execute the instruc-
     tion. (Examples of privileges include the machine state, the executing ring/segment/domain/
     privilege level, physical memory location of the instruction, etc.)

  5. How does the process address translation (logical/virtual to physical) work in your
     system?

  6. (a) How does 1/0 processing address translation work for the Direct Memory Access
     (DMA) controllers/devices? (b) Identify if the address translation is done through the
     memory address translation unit or if the logic is part of the controller. (c) How are
     the address translation maps and/or tables initialized?

  7. Describe the hardware protection mechanisms provided by the system.

  8. Describe what hardware mechanisms are used to isolate the TCB from untrusted ap-
     plications.

9. (a) What are the machine/processor states supported by the system? (b) How are the
states changed? (c) What data structures are saved as part of the processor state?

  10. List all the (a) interrupts and (b) traps (hardware and software). (c) How are they
     serviced by the system?




                                       7

BI:


11. Provide a high-level block diagram of a CPU. The diagram should explain the rela-
   tionship among elements such as: Instruction Processor, Microsequencer, Microengine,
   Memory, Cache, Memory Mapping or Address Translation Unit, I/0 devices and in-
   terfaces.
12. Describe the hardware isolation mechanisms for the process memory (e.g., rings, seg-
   ments, privilege levels).
13. (a) Provide a description of the hardware process address space. (b) When and (c)
   how is it formed? (d) How does the software use this mechanism, if it does at all?































                                       8

2.4     SOFTWARE
The TCB software consists of the elements that are involved in enforcing the system security
policy. Examples of TCB elements include: kernel, interrupt handlers, process manager, 1/0
handlers, 1/0 manager, user/process interface, hardware, and command languages/interfaces
(for system generation, operator, administrator, users, etc.). The security kernel consists of
the hardware, firmware and software elements of the TCB that are involved in implementing
the reference monitor concept, i.e., the ones that mediate all access to objects by subjects.
CI:

  1. Provide a (a) description and (b) architecture of the Trusted Computing Base (TCB)
     at the element level (see above for examples of elements).
  2. Describe the interface between the TCB and user processes that are outside the TCB.
  3. Describe the hardware ring/domain/privilege level/memory segment/physical location
     where each TCB element resides.
  4. Describe the hardware ring/domain/privilege level/memory segment/physical location
     where the user processes reside.
  5. (a) List software mechanisms that are used to isolate and protect the TCB. (b) Provide
     a brief description of each mechanism.
  6. List all the privileges a process can have. Include the privileges based on the process
     or user profile, process or user name, or process or user identification.
  7. How are a process's privileges determined?
  8. (a) List the process states and (b) briefly state conditions under which a transition
     from one state to another occurs.
  9. Briefly describe process scheduling.
  10. Describe all interprocess communications mechanisms.
  11. (a) Describe the file management system. This should include the directory hierarchy,
     if any, directory and file attributes. (b) Also identify all system directories and files
     and (c) their access attributes.
  12. How are (a) I/0 devices and (b) their queues (if any) managed?
  13. How are the (a) batch jobs and (b) their queues managed?
  14. What software engineering tools and techniques were used for the TCB design and
     implementation?
                                       9

C2:

  15. Describe the interfaces (control and data flow) among the TCB elements.
  16. Describe the interface between the kernel and the rest of the TCB elements.
  17. Describe how the process states are manipulated by the TCB.
  18. (a) Describe the data structures for a process context. Describe both (b) hardware
     and (c) software mechanisms used to manipulate/switch the process context.

BI:

  19. (a) List software mechanisms that are used to isolate and protect user processes. (b)
     Provide a brief description of each mechanism.
  20. (a) Describe various elements of the process address space and (b) their location in
     terms of ring/domain/privilege level/segment/physical memory.
  21. How is a process' sensitivity level determined?

B2:

  22. How was the modularity requirement achieved and implemented?
  23. (a) For each TCB element, identify protection-critical portions of the code. (b) De-
     scribe the protection-critical functions performed by the code.
  24. (a) Is the TCB layered? (b) If yes, how many layers are in the TCB? Provide a brief
     description of (c) modules and (d) functions in each layer. (e) How are the lower layers
     protected from higher layers?

B3:

  25. How does the architecture limit or restrict the ability of untrusted code to exploit
     covert channels?
  26. How is the least privilege requirement achieved and implemented?
  27. (a) For each TCB element, identify non-protection-critical portions of the code. (b)
     Explain why the code is part of the TCB.
  28. How was the data abstraction and information hiding requirement achieved and im-
     plemented?
                                      10

2.5     DISCRETIONARY ACCESS CONTROL
CI:
  1. What mechanisms are used to provide discretionary access controls? (Examples of
     mechanisms are: access control lists, protection bits, capabilities, etc.)
  2. (a) Can the access be granted to the users on an individual user basis? (b) If so, how?
  3. (a) How is a group defined? (b) What mechanisms are used to administer groups (i.e.,
     to create or delete groups or to add or delete individual users from a group)? (c)
     Who can invoke these mechanisms? (d) What privileges are necessary to invoke these
     mechanisms?
  4. How can the access be revoked on an individual user basis?
  5. How can the access be revoked on a group basis?
  6. List any objects that can be accessed by users excluded from the DAC policy (e.g.,
     IPC files, process signaling/synchronization flags) ?1
  7. For each TCB object identified in question 1, section 2.2, describe the DAC mechanism
     which protects that object.
  8. (a) List the access modes supported by the system (e.g., read, write, delete, owner,
     execute, append). (b) Briefly describe the meaning of each access mode for each object.
  9. (a) Are conflicts between user and group access detected?  (b) If so, how are the
     conflicts resolved?
  10. For each object, list when changes in DAC permissions become effective.

C2:

  11. (a) Can access be granted to groups of individuals? (b) If so, how?
  12. (a) What are the initial access permissions when an object is created? (b) Can the
     initial access permission be changed? If so, (c) by whom (e.g., user/owner, system
     administrator, others) and (d) how.
  13. (a) Can different initial access permissions be specified for different users, or is this is
     a system-wide setting? If the former, (b) by whom and (c) how?
  1This question is not applicable above class BI, because then all oI~jects have to be protected.


                                      11

  14. (a) Who can grant the access permissions to an object after the.object is created?
     (Examples include creator, current owner, system administrator, etc.) (b) How is the
     permission granted?
  15. (a) Can the ability to grant permissions be passed to another user? If so, (b) by whom
     and (c) how? (d) Under what circumstances can the previous owner of the privilege
     retain it?

B3:


  16. (a) Can access be denied to the users on an individual user basis, i.e., exclude individual
     users? (b) If so, how?
  17. (a) Can access be denied to groups of individuals? (b) If so, how?





























                                      12

2.6     IDENTIFICATION & AUTHENTICATION
CI:
   1. (a) Does the system require the users to provide identification at login? (b) If yes,
     what information is requested by the system?

   2. Is there any additional device or physical security required for user identification and
     authentication (I&A) (e.g., terminal ID, pass key, smart card, etc.)?

   3. (a) Does the system authenticate this identity at the time of login? (b) If yes, what
     information is requested by the system? (c) How does the system use this information
     to authenticate the identity?

   4. (a) Describe the algorithms used in user authentication. (b) Where in the system are
     the code and data for authentication (e.g., user/password data base) stored?

   5. How are the authentication code and data protected?

   6. (a) Does the I&A process associate privileges with the user? If so, (b) what and (c)
     how?


C2:


   7. Describe how each user is uniquely identified.


BI:

   8. How does the I&A process associate a sensitivity level with the user?

















                                      13

2.7     OBJECT REUSE
C2:

  1. How is reuse of data in the storage resources (e.g., memory page cache, CPU reg-
     isters, disk sectors, magnetic tapes, removable disk media, terminals) of the system
     prevented? (Examples include writing predefined patterns, writing random patterns,
     preventing reading before writing, etc.)
  2. When do these actions take place: prior to allocation or after deallocation and/or
     release?
  3. Describe the TCB (a) hardware, (b) software and (c) procedural mechanisms used to
     accomplish the clearing for each type of storage resource.
  4. Is it possible to read data that have been "logically" deleted, but not physically removed
     (e.g., attempting to read past the end-of-file mark)?


























                                      14

2.8     AUDIT
C2:
  1. Provide a brief description (preferably in block diagram form) of audit data flow in
     terms of how the data are created, transmitted, stored, and viewed for analysis.
  2. How are the audit logs protected?
  3. (a) How can the audit log be read? (b) Who can invoke these mechanisms? (c) What
     privileges are required to invoke these mechanisms?
  4. (a) What tools are available to output raw or processed (i.e., analyzed and reduced)
     audit information? (b) Who can invoke these tools? (c) What do the tools do in terms
     of audit data reduction? (d) What are the formats of the reports/outputs generated
     by these tools?
  5. (a) How can the audit log be written or appended? (b) Who can invoke these mecha-
     nisms? (c) What privileges are required to invoke these mechanisms?
  6. (a) How can the audit log be deleted? (b) Who can invoke these mechanisms? (c)
     What privileges are required to invoke these mechanisms?
  7. What are the internal formats of audit records?
  8. Provide a list of auditable events (examples include attempted logins, logouts, creation
     of subjects, deletion of subjects, assignment of privileges to subjects, change of subject
     privileges, use of privileges by subjects, creation of objects, deletion of objects, initial
     access to objects (introduction of the object into a user's address space), assumption
     of the role of security administrator).
  9. (a) Which actions by the trusted users are auditable?  (b) Which are not?  (Ex-
     amples of trusted users are system operator, account administrator, system security
     officer/administrator, auditor, system programmer, etc. Trusted users almost always
     have at least one privilege.)
10.  (a) What data are recorded for each audit event? (b) Which of the following data (if
     any) are not recorded for each event: date, time, user, object, object DAC information
     (e.g., ACL), type of event, invoked or not invoked, why not invoked, success or failure
     in execution,terminal identification?
11.  (a) Can the password ever become part of the audit record? (b) If yes, under what
     circumstances can this occur?


                                      15

  12. (a) What mechanisms are available to designate and change the activities being au-
     dited? (b) Who can invoke these mechanisms? (c) What privileges are needed to
     invoke these mechanisms?
  13. (a) What mechanisms are available for selective auditing (i.e., selection of events,
     subjects, objects, etc., to be audited)? (b) What parameters (e.g., individual or group
     of subjects, individual objects, subjects within a sensitivity range, objects within a
     sensitivity range, event type) or combination of parameters can be specified for the
     selective auditing? (c) Who can invoke these mechanisms? (d) What privileges are
     needed to invoke these mechanisms?
  14. When do changes to the audit parameters take effect (e.g., immediately for all pro-
     cesses, for new processes)?
  15. (a) Are the audit reduction tools part of the TCB? (b) If not, what trusted mechanism
     is used to view/output the audit log?
  16. (a) Does the system produce multiple audit logs? (b) If yes, what tools, techniques
     and methodologies are available to correlate these logs?
  17. (a) Who (e.g., operator, system administrator or other trusted user) is notified when
     the audit log gets full? (b) What options are available to handle the situation ?
  18. What other action does the TCB take when the audit log becomes full (e.g., halt the
     system, do not perform auditable events, overwrite oldest audit log data).
  19. (a) In the worst case, how much audit data can be lost (e.g., when audit log overflows,
     system goes down with audit data in memory buffers)? (b) Describe the worst case
     scenario. (c) When can it occur?

BI:


  20. Which of the following events auditable: change in the device designation of single-
     level or multilevel, change in device level, change in device minimum or maximum
     level, override of banner page or page top and bottom markings?'
  21. Are the (a) subject and (b) object sensitivity level recorded as part of the audit event?

B2:


  22. Are events that exploit covert storage channels auditable?



                                      16

B3:

23. How does the TCB (a) designate and (b) change the occurrence or accumulation of
   events that require real-time notification?  (c) Who can invoke these mechanisms?
   (d) What privileges are needed to invoke these mechanisms? (e) Who (e.g., system
   administrator, president of the company) gets the real-time notification? (f) What
   actions/options are available to the individual being notified? What does the TCB do
   about (g) the event and (h) the process that caused this alert?



































                                      17

2.9     LABELS
BI:

  1. (a) How many hierarchical sensitivity classifications (such as unclassified, confidential,
     secret, top secret), does your system provide for? (b) What mechanisms are available
     to define the internal/storage and external/print format? (c) What mechanisms are
     available to change them? (d) Who can invoke these mechanisms?
  2. (a) How many non-hierarchical sensitivity categories (such as FOUO) does your system
     provide for? (b) What mechanisms are available to define the internal/storage and
     external/print format? (c) What mechanisms are available to change them? (d) Who
     can invoke these mechanisms?
  3. (a) What is the internal TCB storage format of the sensitivity label? (b) If different
     for different subjects or objects, give all formats.
  4. For each type of subject, where is the subject sensitivity label stored?
  5. For each type of object, where is the object sensitivity label stored?
  6. (a) List any subjects and objects that are not labeled. (b) Why are they not labeled?
     How are these subjects and objects (c) accessed and (d) controlled?
  7. (a) How is imported data labeled? (b) How is this label determined? Is a human being
     involved in (c) the determination or (d) the actual labeling? (e) If so, what is the role
     of the person involved (e.g., system administrator, system operator)? (f) Does the
     labeling require special privileges? (g) If so, what are those privileges?
  8. (a) Who can change the labels on a subject? (b) How?
  9. (a) Who can change the labels on an object? (b) How?
10.  How are the labels associated with objects communicated outside the TCB?
11. (a) How does the system designate each device to be single-level or multilevel? (b)
     List the ways this designation can be changed. (c) List the users who can perform this
     designation.
12. (a) How does the TCB designate the sensitivity level of a single-level device? (b) List
     the ways this designation can be changed. (c) List the users who can do this.
13. (a) How does the TCB export the sensitivity label associated with an object being
     exported over a multilevel device? (b) What is theJormat for the exported label? (c)
     How does the TCB ensure that the sensitivity label is properly associated with the
     object?
                                      18

  14. (a) What mechanisms are available to specify the human-readable print label associated
     with a sensitivity label? (b) Who can invoke these mechanisms?
  15. (a) Is the beginning and end of each hardcopy output marked with the human-readable
     print label representing the sensitivity level of the output (i.e., does each hardcopy
     output have banner pages)?  (b) What happens if a banner page output is longer
     and/or wider than a physical page?
  16. (a) Is the top and bottom of each hardcopy output page marked with the human-
     readable print label representing the sensitivity level of the output? (b) What happens
     if the print label is wider and/or longer than the space available for the top and/or
     the bottom?
  17. How does the TCB mark the top and bottom page of non-textual type of output such
     as graphics, maps, and images?
  18. (a) How can the top and bottom page markings be overridden? (b) Who can override
     the markings?
  19. How can an operator distinguish the TCB-generated banner pages from user output?

B2:

  20. (a) How does the TCB acknowledge a change in the sensitivity level associated with
     an interactive user? (b) Is the user notification posted on the user terminal? (c) How
     immediate is this change?
  21. (a) How does a user query the system TCB for his or her current sensitivity label? (b)
     What part of the sensitivity label is output? (c) Where is this output posted?
  22. (a) How does the TCB designate the minimum and maximum sensitivity levels of a
     device? (b) List the ways these designations can be changed. (c) List the users who
     can invoke these mechanisms.
23.  List the circumstances under which the TCB allows input or outj~ut of data that fall
     outside a device's sensitivity range.









                                      19

2.10     MANDATORY ACCESS CdNTROL
BI:


  1. Define the MAC policy for the possible access modes such as read, write, append,
     delete.
  2. (a) Does the system use sensitivity labels to enforce the MAC? (b) If not, what infor-
     mation is used to make the MAC decisions?
  3. (a) List the subjects, objects, and circumstances under which the MAC policy is not
     enforced.2 (b) Why is it not enforced in these cases?
  4. In what sequence does the system perform access mediation? (An example sequence
     might be a. check for privileges that supersede MAC and DAC, then b. check for
     DAC, then c. check for MAC.)
  5. (a) Does the TCB support system-low and system-high sensitivity levels? If yes, how
     can they be (b) designated and (c) changed? Who can invoke the functions to (d)
     designate and (e) change them? How are these levels used by the system in (f) various
     labeling functions and (g) MAC decisions?





















  2This question is not applicable above class BI, because then all objects have to be protected.
                                      20

2.11    TESTING
CI:
  1. (a) What routines are available to test the correct operation of the system hardware
     and firmware? (b) What elements of the system hardware are tested through these
     routines? (c) What elements of the system firmware are tested through these routines?
     (d) What elements of the system hardware and firmware are not tested through these
     routines? (e) Does the testing include boundary and anomalous conditions? (f) Is the
     emphasis on diagnosing and pinpointing faults or is it on ensuring the correct operation
     of the system hardware and firmware?
  2. (a) How are the routines in the previous question invoked? (b) Who can invoke these
     routines? (c) Do they run under the control of the operating system or do they run in
     stand-alone mode?
  3. (a) When can these routines be run? (b) When should these routines be run? (c) If
     they run automatically, when do they run (e.g., powerup, booting, rebooting)?
  4. Describe the software development testing methodology. In this description, include a
     discussion of various testing steps such as unit, module, integration, subsystem, system
     testing. This discussion should include a description of test coverage criteria and test
     cases development methodology.
  5. Provide (a) a copy of the security test plan, a brief description of its contents, or an
     annotated outline. (b) Does the test plan include the following information: system
     configuration for testing, procedures to generate the TCB, procedures to bring up the
     system, testing schedule, test procedures, test cases, expected test results? (c) Provide
     a schedule for development of the security test plan if such a test plan doesn't already
     exist.
  6. (a) How thorough is the security testing?  (b) Do the test cases include nominal,
     boundary, and anomalous values for each input? (c) What about the combinations of
     inputs? (d) Describe the test coverage criteria.
  7. (a) How are the test cases developed? (b) Are they based on the concept of functional
     testing, structural testing, or a combination of the two?
  8. What tools and techniques (automated, manual, or a combination of the two) will be
     used to do the functional and/or structural analysis in order to develop a thorough set
     of test cases?



                                      21

BI:

  9. How do you plan to ascertain that errors have been minimized in the system?


B2:

  10. What is the role of the descriptive top-level specification (DTLS) in the functional
     and/or structural analysis done in order to develop a thorough set of test cases?

  11. (a) Do you plan to develop scenarios for penetration testing? (b) If so, what method-
     ologies will be used?

  12. How do you plan to compute and verify the bandwidths of covert channels?


Al:

  13. What is the role of the formal top-level specification (FTLS) in the functional and/or
     structural analysis done in order to develop a thorough set of test cases?































                                      22

2.12     MODELING AND ANALYSig
BI:

  1. Describe the system security policy.

  2. How is the system security policy represented in the informal model?

  3. What policies are represented in the informal model (e.g., MAC, DAC, privileges, other
     protection mechanisms, object reuse )?

  4. What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to demonstrate the model consis-
     tent with its axioms?


B2:


  5. (a) Provide a copy of the Verification Plan, a brief description of its contents, or an
     annotated outline. (b) Provide a schedule for completion of the Verification Plan.

  6. What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to represent the formal model of
     the system security policy?

  7. What policies are represented in the formal model (e.g., MAC, DAC, privileges, other
     protection mechanisms, object reuse)?

  8. What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to prove the model consistent with
     its axioms?

  9. (a) What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to represent the descriptive
     top-level specificatidn (DTLS)? (b) What portions of the TCB are represented by the
     DTLS?

  10. What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to identify, analyze, calculate, and
     reduce the bandwidths of covert channels?


B3:

  11. What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to show that the DTLS is consistent
     with the formal security policy model?





                                      23

12. (a) What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to represent the formal top-level
   specification (FTLS)? (b) What portions of the TCB are represented by the FTLS?
13. What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to verify or show that the FTLS
   is consistent with the formal security policy model?
14. What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to identify the implemented code
   modules that correspond to the FTLS?
15. What tools, techniques and methodologies are used to show that the code is correctly
   implemented vis-a-vis the FTLS?































                                      24

2.13     OTHER ASSURANCES
Although the configuration management criteria do not appear until class B2 in the TC-
SEC, the questions pertaining to configuration management below are relevant to all classes
because of the NSA's Ratings Maintenance Phase (RAMP) program.
CI:

  1. (a) Describe the Configuration Management (CM) system in place in terms of orga-
     nizational responsibilities, procedures, and tools and techniques (automated, manual,
     or a combination of the two). (b) Describe the version control or other philosophy to
     ensure that the elements represent a consistent system, i.e., object code represents the
     source code, and the design documentation accurately describes the source code. (c) If
     the CM system is different for some of the elements listed in question 1 in section 2.4,
     answer this question for each of the elements.
  2. (a) When was this system placed under configuration management? (b) Provide the
     approximate date, as well as the life-cycle phase (e.g., design, development, testing).
     Answer this question for each system element so controlled (as listed in the previous
     question).
  3. List the elements that are and are not under the Configuration Management (e.g., hard-
     ware, firmware, formal security policy model, FTLS, DTLS, design data and documen-
     tation, source code, object code, test plans, Security Features User's Guide, Trusted
     Facilities Manual).
  4. Describe the protection mechanisms in place to safeguard the CM elements.
  5. (a) List separately the functions that can be performed by each of the trusted users
     (e.g., operator, seci~nty administrator, accounts administrator, auditor, systems pro-
     grammer). (b) For each of these persons/roles, list the system data bases that can be
     accessed and their access modes. (c) Also list the privileges provided to each of these
     roles.
  6. (a) How does the TCB recognize that a user has assumed one of the above-mentioned
     trusted roles? (b) Which of the above-mentioned functions can be performed without
     the TCB recognizing this role?
  7. (a) Does the system have a degraded mode of operation? (b) What can cause this to
     occur? (c) How long can the system keep running in this mode? (d) How does an
     operator get the system back to full operation? (e) What security-related services are
     provided in the degraded mode? (f) What security-related services are not provided?


                                      25

B2:

  8. Describe the version control or other philosophy to ensure that the object code cor-
     responds to the correct source code, which in turn is accurately abstracted in the
     DTLS.

  9. (a) When (e.g., before user authentication) and (b) how (e.g., by typing a specific
     control character sequence) can the trusted path be invoked by the user? (c) What
     TCB elements are involved in establishing the trusted path?

  10. How does the TCB ensure that the trusted path is unspoofable?

  11. How do you plan to show consistency between the DTLS and the code?


B3:

  12. What security relevant actions are able to be performed under trusted path?

  13. Are there other system interfaces which support the same functionality as provided in
     the trusted path?

  14. (a) How does the system recovery work? What system resources (e.g., memory, disks
     blocks, files) are protected (b) prior to and (c) during the system recovery? (d) How
     are they protected? (e) What resources are not protected?


Al:

  15. Describe the version control or other philosophy which ensures that the FTLS continues
     to accurately describe the system through system changes.

  16. How do you plan to show consistency among the FTLS, DTLS and the code?

  17. Describe the tools, techniques and procedures used to ensure the integrity of the TCB
     elements (hardware, firmware, software, documents, etc.) supplied to the customers
     (e.g., trusted courier, electronic seals, physical seals).











                                      26

2.14     OTHER DOCUMENTATION
CI:
  1. (a) Describe the methodology used in the design of the system. (b) Provide a list of
     documents that capture the system design. (c) For each document, provide a copy, a
     brief description of its contents, or an annotated outline. (d) Provide a schedule for
     development of the design documents.
  2. Does the SFUG describe (a) the protection mechanisms provided by the TCB, (b)
     guidelines on their use, and (c) how they interact?
  3. Does the SFUG explain to users the underlying philosophy of protection for the system?
  4. Does the SFUG discuss the need for exercising sound security practices in protecting
     the information processed and/or stored in the system, including all input and output?
  5. Does the SFUG describe users' responsibilities with respect to assuring the effectiveness
     of the protective features (e.g., password selection and protection)?
  6. Does the SFUG describe security-related commands available to users?
  7. Does the SFUG explain how to use the DAC mechanism(s) provided by the system to
     protect objects?
  8. Does the SFUG explain how removable media are to be handled (if applicable)?
  9. Does the SFUG discuss the auditing of security-relevant events?
  10. Does the SFUG include and clearly highlight warnings where needed?
  11. (a) Does the TFM ~~ontain procedures to configure the secure system? (b) Does it list
     the devices and hardware elements that are part of the evaluated configuration? Does
     it contain procedures (c) for configuring each of the devices, (d) for connecting them,
     and (e) for configuring the entire system? (f) Does it list the devices that are not part
     of the evaluated configuration? (g) Does it list the procedures for securely configuring
     them out and for disconnecting them?
12.  Does the TFM list the (a) functions, (b) privileges, and (c) data bases that are to be
     controlled? (d) Does it describe how these are controlled? (e) Does it describe the
     consequences of granting access to them as warnings?
13.  (a) Does the TFM contain the procedures and warnings relating to the secure operation
     of the computing facility? (b) Does it address the physical, personnel, and adminis-
     trative aspects of security in order to ensure the pr~~tection of computing hardware,
     firmware, software, and privileged devices such as the operator terminals?
                                      27

  14. Does the TFM contain the procedures for securely starting/booting/initializing the
     system?

C2:


  15. (a) Does the TFM provide procedures for maintaining the audit log?  (b) Does it
     describe how ihe audit log can be turned on, turned off, combined with other audit
     logs, and backed up? (c) Does it describe how to detect that the audit log is getting
     full, or is full, and what actions to take in order to minirnize the loss of audit data?
  16. Does the TFM contain the (a) structure of the audit log file and the (b) format of
     the audit records? (c) Does it describe how the audit records can be viewed? Does
     it (d) describe the capabilities of the audit reduction tool, (e) how to invoke these
     capabilities, and (f) the format of the tool output?

BI:


  17. Does the TFM address the protection of hard-copy outputs?
  18. (a) Does the TFM provide a list of trusted users (e.g., system operator, security ad-
     ministrator, accounts administrator, auditor) and trusted processes (device queue ma-
     nipulation, user profile editor)? (b) For each trusted user or process, does it list the
     functions (e.g., creating and deleting users, changing user security profile, setting up
     defaults for discretionary and mandatory access controls, selecting auditing events),
     privileges, and data bases (e.g., user security profiles, authentication data base) to be
     accessed?

B2:


  19. (a) Does the TFM contain procedures to generate the TCB from source code? (b)
     For each system parameter or input, does the TFM list valid values for a secure TCB
     generation?
  20. Does the TFM include a list of TCB modules that make up the security kernel?
  21. Are the separate operator and administrator functions clearly identified and described?

B3:


  22. Does the TFM contain the procedures for secureJy restarting/resuming the system
     after a lapse in system operation, or a system failure?
                                      28

Chapter 3

GLOSSARY

Access A specific type of interaction between a subject and an object that results in the
     flow of information from one to the other.
Access List A list of users, programs, and/or processes and the specifications of access
     categories to which each is assigned.
Administrative User A user assigned to supervise all or a portion of an ADP system.
Audit To conduct the independent review and examination of system records and activi-
     ties.
Audit Trail A chronological record of system activities that is sufficient to enable the
     reconstruction, reviewing, and examination of the sequence of environments and activ-
     ities surrounding or leading to an operation, a procedure, or an event in a transaction
     from its inception to final results.
Auditor An authorized individual, or role, with administrative duties, which include
     selecting the events to be audited on the system, setting up the audit flags that enable
     the recording of those events, and analyzing the trail of audit events.
Authenticate (l) To verify the identity of a user, device, or other entity in a computer
     system, often as a prerequisite to allowing access to resources in a system. (2) To
     verify the integrity of data that have been stored, transmitted, or otherwise exposed
     to possible unauthorized modification.
Authenticated User A user who has accessed an ADP system with a valid identifier
     and authentication combination.
Authorization The granting of access rights to a user, program, or process.


                                      29

Bandwidth A characteristic of a communication channel that is the amount of infor-
     mation that can be passed through it in a given amount of time, usually expressed in
     bits per second.
Bell-LaPadula Model A formal state transition model of computer security policy
     that describes a set of access control rules. In this formal model, the entities in a
     computer system are divided into abstract sets of subjects and objects. The notion of
     a secure state is defined, and it is proven that each state transition preserves security by
     moving from secure state to secure state, thereby inductively proving that the system
     is secure. A system state is defined to be "secure" if the only permitted access modes
     of subjects to objects are in accordance with a specific security policy. In order to
     determine whether or not a specific access mode is allowed, the clearance of a subject is
     compared to the classification of the object, and a determination is made as to whether
     the subject is authorized for the specific access mode. The clearance/classification
     scheme is expressed in terms of a lattice. See Star Property (*-property) and Simple
     Security Property.
Channel An information transfer path within a system. May also refer to the mechanism
     by which the path is effected.
Covert Channel A communication channel that allows an untrusted subject with le-
     gitimate access to information to transfer that information in a manner that violates
     the system's security policy, using a mechanism in some way not intended by the
     system developers.
Covert Storage Channel A covert channel that involves the direct or indirect writ-
     ing of a storage location by one process and the direct or indirect reading of the storage
     location by another process. Covert storage channels typically involve a finite resource
     (e.g., sectors on a disk) that is shared by two subjects at different security levels.
Covert Timing Channel A covert channel in which one process signals information
     to another by modulating its own use of system resources (e.g., CPU time) in such
     a way that this manipulation affects the real response time observed by the second
     process.
Coverage Analysis Qualitative or quantitative assessment of the extent to which the
     test conditions and data show compliance with required properties (e.g., security model
     and TCB primitive properties). See: Test Condition, Test Data, Security Policy Model.
Data Information with a specific physical representation.
Data Integrity The property that data meet an a priori expectation of quality.
Degauss To reduce magnetic flux density to zero by applying a reverse magnetizing field.


                                      30

Descriptive Top-Level Specification (DTLS) A top-level specification that
     is written in a natural language (e.g.,English), an informal program design notation,
     or a combination of the two.
Discretionary Access Control (DAC) A means of restricting access to objects
     based on the identity and need-to-know of the user, process and/or groups to which
     they belong. The controls are discretionary in the sense that a subject with a certain
     access permission is capable of passing that permission (perhaps indirectly) on to any
     other subject.
Dominate Security level S1 is said to dominate security level S2 if the hierarchical classi-
     fication of S1 is greater than or equal to that of S2 and the non-hierarchical categories
     of S1 include all those of 52 as a subset.
Exploitable Channel Any channel that is usable or detectable by subjects external
     to the Trusted Computing Base whose purpose is to violate the security policy of the
     system.
Flaw An error of commission, omission, or oversight in a system that allows protection
     mechanisms to be bypassed.
Flaw Hypothesis Methodology A system analysis and penetration technique in
     which specifications and documentation for the system are analyzed and then flaws
     in the system are hypothesized. The list of hypothesized flaws is prioritized on the
     basis of the estimated probability that a flaw actually exists and, assuming a flaw does
     exist, on the ease of exploiting it and on the extent of control or compromise it would
     provide. The prioritized list is used to direct a penetration attack against the system.
Formal Proof A complete and convincing mathematical argument, presenting the full
     logical justification for each proof step, for the truth of a theorem or set of theorems.
Formal Security Policy Model A mathematically precise statement of a secu-
     rity policy. To be adequately precise, such a model must represent the initial state of
     a system, the way in which the system progresses from one state to another, and a
     definition of a "secure" state of the system. To be acceptable as a basis for a TCB,
     the model must be supported by a formal proof that if the initial state of the system
     satisfies the definition of a "secure" state and if all assumptions required by the model
     hold, then all future states of the system will be secure. Some formal modeling tech-
     niques include: state transition models, temporal logic models, denotational semantics
     models, algebraic specification models.
Formal Top-Level Specification (FTLS) A top-level specification that is writ-
     ten in a formal mathematical language to allow theorems showing the correspondence
     of the system specification to its formal requirements ~o be hypothesized and formally
     proven.
                                      31

Formal Verification The process of using formal proofs to demonstrate the consis-
     tency between a formal specification of a system and a formal security policy model
     (design verification) or between the formal specification and its program implementa-
     tion (implementation verification).
Functional Testing The segment of security testing in which the advertised mecha-
     nisms of a system are tested, under operational conditions, for correct operation.
Identification The process that enables recognition of an entity by a system, generally
     by the use of unique machine-readable user names.
Integrity Sound, unimpaired or perfect condition.
Internal Security Controls Hardware, firmware, and software features within a
     system that restrict access to resources (hardware, software, and data) to authorized
     subjects only (persons, programs, or devices).
Isolation The containment of subjects and objects in a system in such a way that they
     are separated from one another, as well as from the protection controls of the operating
     system.
Lattice A non-empty set X with a reflexive partial order such that for every pair x,y of
     members X, there is a unique smallest element greater than each x and y and a unique
     largest element that is smaller than each x and y.
Least Privilege This principle requires that each subject in a system be granted the
     most restrictive set of privileges (or lowest clearance) needed for the performance of
     authorized tasks. The application of this principle limits the damage that can result
     from accident, error, or unauthorized use.
Mandatory Access Control (MAC) A means of restricting access to objects
     based on the sensitivity (as represented by a label) of the information contained in the
     objects and the formal authorization (i.e., clearance) of subjects to access information
     of such sensitivity.
Multilevel Device A device that is used in a manner that permits it to simultaneously
     process data of two or more security levels without risk of compromise. To accomplish
     this, sensitivity labels are normally stored on the same physical medium and in the
     same form (i.e., machine-readable or human-readable) as the data being processed.
Object A passive entity that contains or receives information. Access to an object poten-
     tially implies access to the information it contains. Examples of objects are: records,
     blocks, pages, segments, files, directories, directory tree, and programs, as well as bits,
     bytes, words, fields, processors, video displays, keyboards, clocks, printers, network
     nodes.

                                      32

Object Reuse The reassignment and reuse of a storage medium (e.g., cage frame, disk
     sector, magnetic tape) that once contained one or more objects. To be securely reused
     and assigned to a new subject, storage media must contain no residual data (magnetic
     remanence) from the object(s) previously contained in the media.
Partial Ordering A partial order on a set X is a relation R having the property that
     if (x,y) is in R and (y,z) is in R, then (x,z) is in R. A partial order is reflexive if (x,x)
     is in R for each x in X.
Penetration The successful act of bypassing the security mechanisms of a system.
Process A program in execution.
Protection-Critical Portions of the TCB Those portions of the TCB whose
     normal function is to deal with the control of access between subjects and objects.
     Their correct operation is essential to the protection of data on the system.
Read A fundamental operation that results only in the flow of information from an object
     to a subject.
Read Access (Privilege) Permission to read information.
Reference Monitor Concept An access-control concept that refers to an abstract
     machine that mediates all accesses to objects by subjects.
Security Level The combination of a hierarchical classification and a set of non-hierarchical
     categories that represents the sensitivity of information.
Security Policy The set of laws, rules, and practices that regulate how an organization
     manages, protects, and distributes sensitive information.
Security Policy Model A formal presentation of the security policy enforced by the
     system. It must ideAtify the set of rules and practices that regulate how a system
     manages, protects, and distributes sensitive information. See Bell-LaPadula Model
     and Formal Security Policy Model.
Security-Relevant Event Any event that attempts to change tide security state of
     the system, (e.g., change discretionary access controls, change the security level of
     the subject, change user password).  Also, any event that attempts to violate the
     security policy of the system, (e.g., too many attempts to log in, attempts to violate
     the mandatory access control limits of a device, attempts to downgrade a file).
Security Testing A process used to determine that the security features of a system
     are implemented as designed. This includes hands-on functional testing, penetration
     testing, and verification.


                                      33

Simple Security Property A Bell-LaPadula security model rule allowing a subject
     read access to an object only if the security level of the subject dominates the security
     level of the object. Also called simple security condition.

Single-Level Device An automated information systems device that is used to pro-
     cess data of a single security level at any one time.

Spoofing An attempt to gain access to a system by posing as an authorized user. Syn-
     onymous with impersonating, masquerading or mimicking.

Star Property A Bell-LaPadula security model rule allowing a subject write access to
     an object only if the security level of the object dominates the security level of the
     subject. Also called confinement property, *-property.

Subject An active entity, generally in the form of a person, process, or device, that
     causes information to flow among objects or changes the system state. Technically, a
     process/domain pair.

Subject Security Level A subject's security level is equal to the security level of
     the objects to which it has both read and write access. A subject's security level must
     always be dominated by the clearance of the user the subject is associated with.

Terminal Identification The means used to provide unique identification of a ter-
     minal to a system.

Test Condition A statement defining a constraint that must be satisfied by the pro-
     gram under test.

Test Data The set of specific objects and variables that must be used to demonstrate
     that a program produces a set of given outcomes.

Test Plan A document or a section of a document which describes the test conditions,
     data, and coverage of a particular test of group of tests. See also: Test Condition, Test
     Data, Coverage Analysis.

Test Procedure (Script) A set of steps necessary to carry; out one or a group of
     tests. These include steps for test environment initialization, ~es~ execution, and result
     analysis. The test procedures are carried out by test operators.

Test Program A program which implements the test conditions when initialized with
     the test data and which collects the results produced by the program being tested.

Top-Level Specification A nonprocedural description of system behavior at the
     most abstract level, typically, a functional specification that omits all implementation
     details.



                                      34

Trusted Computer System A system that employs sufficient hardware and soft-
     ware integrity measures to allow its use for processing simultaneously a range of sen-
     sitive or classified information.
Trusted Computing Base (TCB) The totality of protection mechanisms within
     a computer system-including hardware, firmware, and software-the combination of
     which is responsible for enforcing a security policy. It creates a basic protection envi-
     ronment and provides additional user services required for a trusted computer system.
     The ability of a trusted computing base to correctly enforce a security policy depends
     solely on the mechanisms within the TCB and on the correct input by system ad-
     ministrative personnel of parameters (e.g., a user's clearance) related to the security
     policy.
Trusted Path A mechanism by which a person at a terminal can communicate directly
     with the Trusted Computing Base. This mechanism can only be activated by the
     person or the Trusted Computing Base and cannot be imitated by untrusted software.
     Person or process accessing an AIS either by direct connections (i.e., via terminals),
     or indirect connections (i.e., prepare input data or receive output that is not reviewed
     for content or classification by a responsible individual).
Verification The process of comparing two levels of system specification for proper
     correspondence (e.g., security policy model with top-level specification, top-level spec-
     ification with source code, or source code with object code). This process may or may
     not be automated.
Verification Plan A deliverable as specified in the Trusted Product Evaluation Man-
     agement Plan. It indicates how the system design will be verified. It should include
     identification of the specification language/system to be used, an indication of any spe-
     cial features of the language that will be used, and the planned number of levels that
     specifications will be written for. The method to be used for theorem proving, either
     manual, interactive 6r automated, should be indicated. The plan will be submitted to
     the team for review.
Write A fundamental operation that results only in the flow of information from a subject
     to an object.
Write Access (Privilege) Permission to write an object.








                                      35

Chapter 4

                                  REFERENCES

  1. Department of Defense, Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria, DoD 5200.28-
     STD, December 1985.
  2. Department of Defense, Security Requirements for Automated Information Systems
     (AISs), DoD Directive 5200.28, 21 March 1988.
  3. Aerospace Report No. TOR-0086 (6777-25)1, Trusted Computer System Eval-
     uation Management Plan, 1 October 1985.
  4. National Computer Security Center, NCSC-TG-002 Version-I, Trusted Prod-
     uct Evaluations - A Guide For Vendors, 1 March 1988(DRAFT).
  5. National Computer Security Center, NCSC-TG-004 Version l, Glossary of
     Computer Security Terms, 21 October 1988.
  6. National Computer Security Center, NCSC-TG-013 Version I, Rating Main-
     tenance Phase - Program Document, 23 June 1989.













                                      36


