NATIONAL COMPUTER SECURITY CENTER

NCSC TECHNICAL REPORT-004

Library No. S-241,359



A GUIDE TO PROCUREMENT OF 
SINGLE AND CONNECTED SYSTEMS



LANGUAGE FOR RFP SPECIFICATIONS

AND STATEMENTS OF WORK - AN AID 

TO PROCUREMENT INITIATORS



INCLUDES COMPLEX, EVOLVING, 

MULTIPOLICY SYSTEMS







July 1994

Approved for Public Release:

Distribution Unlimited



NCSC TECHNICAL REPORT-004

Library No. S-241,359

July 1994

FOREWORD



This technical report is a strawman update to Volume 2 of 4 of the procurement 
guideline series. The previous version was updated to deal with complex, evolving, 
multipolicy systems. It is written to help facilitate the acquisition of trusted computer 
systems in accordance with DoD 5200.28-STD, "Department of Defense Trusted 
Computer System Evaluation Criteria." It is designed for new or experienced automated 
information system developers, purchasers, or program managers who must identify 
and satisfy requirements associated with security-relevant acquisitions. Information 
contained within this series will facilitate subsequent development of procurement 
guidance for future national criteria. This series also includes information being 
developed for certification and accreditation guidance. Finally this Volume 2 
procurement strawman addresses the way by which Trusted Computer System 
Evaluation Criteria, the Trusted Network Interpretation, and the Trusted Database 
Management System Interpretation using a new approach called Domains of Constant 
Policy are translated into language for use in the Request for Proposal (RFP) 
Specifications and Statements of Work.

The business of computers, security, and acquisitions is complex and dynamic. I invite 
your recommendations for revision to this technical guideline. Our staff will work to 
keep it current. However, experience of users in the field is the most important source of 
timely information. Please send comments and suggestions to:



National Computer Security Center

9800 Savage Road

Fort George G. Meade, MD 20755-6000



ATTN: Standards, Criteria, and Guidelines Division



Reviewed by:_______________________________________

		GLENN GOMES

		Chief, INFOSEC Standards, Criteria & Guidelines Division



Released by:_______________________________________ 

		ROBERT J. SCALZI

		Chief, INFOSEC Systems Engineering Office



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS



This document has been produced under the guidance of MAJOR (USA) Melvin L. De 
Vilbiss, the National Security Agency (NSA). It was developed by Howard L. Johnson, 
Information Intelligence Sciences, Inc.



This STRAWMAN was delivered to the Government in March 1993, as Howard 
Johnson's last deliverable under contract before his passing on 14 May 1993. We dedicate 
this document in his memory.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

FOREWORD												 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS											

1.0	GENERAL INFORMATION				 							

	1.1	INTRODUCTION 

	1.2	PURPOSE 

		1.2.1	Facilitating the Contracting Process 	

		1.2.2	Facilitating Fairness in Competitive Acquisition	 

		1.2.3	Minimizing Procurement Cost and Risk	 

		1.2.4	Ensuring the Solicitation is Complete Before Issuance	 

	1.3	SCOPE 	

	1.4	BACKGROUND	 

	1.5	COMPLEX SYSTEMS	 

2.0	PROCUREMENT PROCESS	 

3.0	REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL 	

	3.1	SECTION C - DESCRIPTIONS/SPECIFICATIONS 	

	3.2	SECTION C - STATEMENTS OF WORK 	

	3.3	SECTION F - DELIVERIES AND PERFORMANCE	 

	3.4	SECTION H - SPECIAL CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS	 

	3.5	SECTION J - LIST OF DOCUMENTS, EXHIBITS, AND OTHER

		ATTACHMENTS	 

	3.6	SECTION L - INSTRUCTIONS, CONDITIONS, AND NOTICES 

		TO OFFERORS	 

	3.7	SECTION M - EVALUATION FACTORS FOR AWARD	 

4.0	OTHER CONSIDERATIONS	 

	4.1	NONMANDATORY REQUIREMENTS AND OPTIONS	 

	4.2	EVIDENCE AVAILABILITY	 

	4.3	DOCUMENTATION COST	 

	4.4	INTERPRETING THE TCSEC	 

5.0	STANDARD SOLICITATION LANGUAGE	 

(The remainder of Chapter 5 is organized according to selected applicable sections of the 
RFP organization.)







SECTION C - DESCRIPTION/SPECIFICATIONS/WORK STATEMENT	 

C.1	SCOPE OF CONTRACT (AUTOMATED INFORMATION SYSTEM - 

	EQUIPMENT, SOFTWARE AND MAINTENANCE)	 

C.2	OPERATIONAL SECURITY SPECIFICATIONS	 

C.3	TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS	 

	C.3.1	Discretionary Access Control Specifications	 

	C.3.2	Object Reuse Specifications	 

	C.3.3	Labels Specifications	 

	C.3.4	Label Integrity Specifications	 

	C.3.5	Exportation of Labeled Information Specifications	 

	C.3.6	Exportation to Multi Level Devices Specifications	 

	C.3.7	Exportation to Single Level Devices Specifications	 

	C.3.8	Labeling Human-readable Output Specifications	 

	C.3.9	Subject Sensitivity Labels Specifications	 

	C.3.10	Device Labels Specifications	 

	C.3.11	Mandatory Access Control Specifications	 

	C.3.12	Identification and Authentication Specifications	 

	C.3.13	Trusted Path Specifications	 

	C.3.14	Audit Specifications	 

	C.3.15	System Architecture Specifications	 

	C.3.16	System Integrity Specifications	 

	C.3.17	Covert Channel Specifications	 

	C.3.18	Trusted Facility Management Specifications	 

	C.3.19	Trusted Recovery Specifications	 

C.4 STATEMENTS OF WORK	 

	C.4.1	Covert Channel Analysis Statement of Work	 

	C.4.2	Trusted Recovery Statement of Work	 

	C.4.3	Security Testing Statement of Work	 

	C.4.4	Design Specification and Verification Statement of Work	 

	C.4.5	Configuration Management Statement of Work	 

	C.4.6	Trusted Distribution Statement of Work	 

	C.4.7	Security Features User's Guide Statement of Work	 

	C.4.8	Trusted Facility Manual Statement of Work	 

	C.4.9	Test Documentation Statement of Work	 

	C.4.10	Design Documentation Statement of Work	 

RFP SECTION F - DELIVERIES AND PERFORMANCE	 

RFP SECTION J - LIST OF DOCUMENTS, EXHIBITS AND OTHER ATTACHMENTS	 

RFP SECTION L - INSTRUCTIONS, CONDITIONS, AND NOTICES TO OFFERORS	 

RFP ATTACHMENT A - CONTRACT DATA REQUIREMENTS LIST (CDRL)

FORM DD1423	

RFP ATTACHMENT B - GLOSSARY	 

RFP ATTACHMENT C - ACRONYMS	 

RFP ATTACHMENT D - REFERENCES	 

(This completes Chapter 5 and organization according to the RFP.)

APPENDIX A BIBLIOGRAPHY	 

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 2-1		Security Related Areas	 

Figure 2-2		Procurement Initiator Guidance	 







LIST OF TABLES

Table 1-1		Procurement Guideline Series 	

Table 3-1		RFP Organization	 

Table F-1		Data Deliverables	 



1	GENERAL INFORMATION

1.1	INTRODUCTION

The National Security Agency (NSA) wants to clarify the computer security aspects of 
the Department of Defense (DoD) automated information system (AIS) acquisition 
process. Therefore, it is producing a four volume guideline series (referenced in Table 1-
1 with more complete titles in the Bibliography). This document is a proposed second 
volume that has been written to deal with complex systems, that is, systems composed 
of systems. These guidelines are intended for Federal agency use in acquiring trusted 
systems.

Table 1-1    Procurement Guideline Series

An Introduction to Procurement Initiators on Computer Security Requirements, December 1992.

Language for RFP Specifications and Statements of Work-An Aid to Procurement Initiators, 30 
June 1993.

Computer Security Contract Data Requirements List and Data Item Descriptions Tutorial, 28 
February 1994.

How to Evaluate a Bidder's Proposal Document-An Aid to Procurement Initiators and 
Contractors (to be published in 1994).



DoD Directive 5200.28, "Security Requirements for Automated Information Systems 
(AISs)," provides security requirements concerning all protection aspects of automated 
information systems. It specifies DoD 5200. 28-STD, "DoD Trusted Computer System 
Evaluation Criteria" (TCSEC), as the requirement source for trusted computer systems. 
The second page of the DoD 5200. 28-STD states: "This document is used to provide a 
basis for specifying security requirements in acquisition specifications.

1.2	PURPOSE

The intended user of the document is the "procurement initiator," to include program 
managers, users, and security managers. These individuals must write the Request for 
Proposal (RFP), specifically Section C, the Specification and Statement of Work. Volume 
1 of this guideline series discusses the responsibilities of different roles in procurement 
initiation.

The purpose of this document is to facilitate the contracting process, to provide 
uniformity in competitive acquisitions, to minimize procurement cost and risk, avoid 
delays in the solicitation process, and to help ensure the solicitation is complete before 
its issuance.

1.2.1	FACILITATING THE CONTRACTING PROCESS

This guideline provides Specification and Statement of Work (SOW) contract language 
to procure a trusted system, hopefully satisfied by products from the NSA Evaluated 
Product List (EPL). This document does not address Government certification and 
accreditation tasks. The guideline is written to ensure the selected 

system will provide adequate security, while avoiding a costly solution. This document 
has no intent beyond the security aspects of the system.

DoD agencies should use this document whenever considering the acquisition of trusted 
computer systems. System security requirements are provided in contract language for 
direct incorporation into a Request For Proposal (RFP). The language duplicates the 
words and intent of the DoD Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), 
DoD 5200. 28-STD. It incorporates the approach to be used and provides interpretations 
to the TCSEC when complex systems are developed. It includes the situation in which 
part of the trusted systems are developed under the Trusted Network Interpretation 
(TNI) or the Trusted Database Interpretation (TDI).

1.2.2	FACILITATING FAIRNESS IN COMPETITIVE ACQUISITIONS

This guideline promotes the use of EPL products while at the same time satisfying 
requirements for fair competition. If these requirements have not been satisfied, the 
procurement can result in a protest and the selection may possibly be nullified. These 
requirements include:

a. Public Law 98-369 "Competition in Contracting Act of 1984"

b. Title 41, United States Code, Section 418, "Advocates for Competition"

c. Title 10, United States Code, Section 2318, "Advocates for Competition"

d. DoD Instruction 5000.2, "Defense Acquisition Management Policy," February 23, 
1991, pp. 5-A-2 through 4

e. DoD 5000. 2-M, "Defense Acquisition Management Documentation and Reports," 
February, 1991, p. 4-D-1-3 d.(1)

1.2.3	MINIMIZING PROCUREMENT COST AND RISK

Version 1 of this procurement guideline series is written solely to acquire products on 
the Evaluated Products List (EPL), that is, to enable the procurement initiator to obtain 
those EPL products available for integration into an application, as opposed to 
developing a system through specification.

For solutions that use EPL products, not only have the specifications of the evaluated 
Division/Class been satisfied, but the assurance tasks have been completed and the 
required documentation produced. Certification evidence, analyses, and operational 
documents previously produced for an NSA evaluation may be available to ensure 
trustworthiness and used directly for certification and satisfaction of required proposal 
and contract data. The results are less development risk and a lower overall cost to the 
bidder and, consequently, to the Government.

For some well defined entity of a system to be regarded as secure in the TCSEC sense 
means that, at a minimum, all of the requirements of some specified TCSEC Division/
Class must be met. This is discussed further in Volume 1, Chapter 3. To call that entity, 
for example, a Class B2 entity would require NSA evaluation as a product satisfying the 
Class B2 criteria. (This convention has evolved over the past several years so that 
products would not be misrepresented in their evaluation status.)

A successful certification evaluation of an entity (which has not been placed on the NSA 
evaluated Products List (EPL)) can only state that evaluation and approval have been 
completed as part of a certification process against the Class B2 set of requirements.

The rationale for this approach is as follows:

a. Although a Division/Class of the TCSEC is used as the basis for the secure part of a 
system, the procurement and build process can introduce new, conflicting requirements 
and relax, reinterpret, or change the intent of some of the existing TCSEC requirements. 
Only an exact evaluation can determine this.

b. The certification evaluation process addresses the needs of a single implementation. It 
has generally not experienced the finely honed expertise of the NSA evaluation process 
and personnel; and does not have the same assurance for additional applications as does 
an EPL product.

The Request for Proposal (RFP) can not dictate that an item come from the EPL because 
of the limited number of items on the EPL and because the process for placement on the 
EPL is itself a restricted, Government controlled process. To state such a requirement in 
the RFP would constitute a discrimination against other vendors desiring to bid. It also 
can not be stated that, for example, "a B2 system is required" because that implies the 
solution must be taken from the EPL. Therefore, the specific TCSEC requirements 
necessary to meet a certain Division/Class rating must be spelled out, without stating 
that the B2 product is desired. However, the desire for decreased risk and cost (common 
to EPL products) is normally a strong evaluation weighting factor for source selection.

1.2.4	ENSURING THE SOLICITATION IS COMPLETE BEFORE ISSUANCE

If we try to use existing TCSEC criteria as RFP requirements, it is found that those 
criteria are not presented in the form and order required by the RFP. The TCSEC 
intermixes system specifications, work statements and products to be delivered. This 
guideline organizes the TCSEC requirements into an RFP format.

1.3	SCOPE

This guideline does not revise the words in DoD 5200. 28-STD; it is a reformatting and 
reordering into a form suitable for use in contractual documents. This document might 
be thought of as an adaptation of the TCSEC for procurement. Procurement 
considerations or interpretations are documented or referenced within the guideline to 
advise the procurement initiator of factors that may influence procurement decisions. 
All of the factors are addressed as possible augmentations to the specification language 
provided.

1.4	BACKGROUND

A Federal Government awareness of the lack of guidance in the security arena led to the 
formation of the DoD Computer Security Evaluation Center (later the National 
Computer Security Center). The Trusted Product Evaluation Program (TPEP) was 
started to provide an "independent laboratory" assessment of commercial products.

The TCSEC was published in 1983 and revised to become a DoD standard in December 
1985 to provide criteria for evaluating security features and assurance requirements 
available in "trusted, commercially available, automatic data processing systems."

The process for acquiring trusted systems is slightly different than other acquisitions. 
The major differences are: 1) that the security requirements may become a major 
constraining factor in determining the solution needed to meet the remaining 
requirements and 2) there exists a void of acquisition guidance for AIS security.

The challenge for the procurement initiator is to specify the requirements with sufficient 
clarity and flexibility to achieve the desired security functions without limiting the 
ingenuity and ability of the offerors to supply a compliant overall solution.

1.5	COMPLEX SYSTEMS

The TCSEC and the TNI specify simple systems in the sense that they are supported by a 
single division/class, a single TCB, and the security requirements that go along with 
them. The TDI was the first guidance to address multiple TCBs by introducing the 
concept of TCB subset and the property of more and less primitive and TCB subset 
dependency. The conceptual portion of the TDI was written primarily to reduce the cost 
of assurance of a system when multiple TCBs are present, especially addressing the case 
when one system has been evaluated successfully under the EPL program (e.g., an 
operating system) and the second system (e.g., a database management system) is being 
added to it at minimum assurance cost.

The general case of interfacing TCBs into a system, existing or not; evaluated or not 
evaluated is not addressed by the TDI. These cases where the principles of composability 
as addressed by the TDI are not or cannot be satisfied, remain to be addressed.

In the approach used here, the system is divided into unique pieces, called domains of 
constant policy (DOCPs). Each DOCP has or is intended to have one TCB which will be 
assigned a Division/Class according to the TCSEC. The only overlapping allowed is 
shared mechanisms. (It may be found later that this is too restrictive, but in the current 
development, this restriction has helped to make the problem manageable in evolving 
C3I systems.) There is no intent to assign the system a division/class rating, but rather to 
require that it conform to specific interface and global policies that will be applicable at 
any Division/Class.

The goal is that each DOCP satisfies a Division/Class and that the system be adequately 
secure at the interfaces and through the communication systems to support the 
individual DOCPs. There is also a set of global policies to be satisfied that have been 
identified in the TDI and are carried forward and used more generally here.

In summary, use of this approach enjoys the following advantages:

·	It offers a solid, intuition supported approach for procurement administrators and DAAs.

·	It requires the statement of operational policy (e.g., DOCPs and n-tuples) from the using 
organization and architecturally reflects that in the design.

·	It enforces precise system covering boundary definition.

·	It allows, and in fact encourages, cost/risk tradeoffs and iteration of operational policy 
assignment.

·	It can be applied to pre-regulatory (TCSEC, TNI and/or TDI) systems where the interpre-
tation of TCB must be made.

·	It does not preclude, and in fact supports use of the TNI and TDI.

·	It forces consideration of cascading risk, requires interface policy, requires global policy.

·	It accommodates/promotes use of EPL products since the basic building block entity of 
a system (a DOCP) has a single policy represented by a division/class requirement of 
the Orange Book.

·	It addresses security interface requirements to be satisfied if an EPL product component 
is going to be integrated into the overall security of the AIS system which may contain 
other EPL products, existing secure systems, or "to be custom built" specifications.





















THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

2	PROCUREMENT PROCESS

The procurement process is governed by policy. Here, three types of policy are 
distinguished. The first kind of policy is referred to simply as security policy or 
regulatory policy. This is security policy that applies to all DoD systems, personnel, and 
operations. Next, computer security policy or COMPUSEC policy is represented by the 
Division/Class criteria in the TCSEC. Finally, operational security policy is that security 
policy associated with a given application including range of classifications, range of 
clearances, categories, mode, and other specific operational security decisions that are 
made. Operational security policy determines which Division/Class should be used and 
the detailed requirements and characteristics demanded of each particular procurement.

The procurement process begins with the determination of operational requirements by 
various Government personnel. They include, but are not limited to, mission users, 
program managers, and acquisition representatives. The primary goals during this 
phase include determining Division/Class and mode of operation, as well as identifying 
those security features and assurances required.

Selection of these security specifications requires a clear understanding of the system 
users' operational and mission needs, the relevant DOD security policies, available 
technologies, and the system's operational environment. Procurement initiators and 
offerors must also consider the security-related areas listed in Figure 2-1 below. More 
detailed information concerning these security areas can be found in DoD 5200.1-R, DoD 
Directive 5200.28, and DoD 5200. 28-M.

Figure 2-1 Security Related Areas

The Designated Approving Authority (DAA) is responsible under Enclosure 4 of DoD 
Directive 5200.28 to determine the minimum AIS computer-based security requirements 
for the mission profile of the system being acquired. Any adjustments to computer 
security evaluation Division/Class (per step 6 of enclosure 4) will have been completed 
prior to writing the RFP. The Division/Class that results from this assessment may be 
changed based on other factors considered by the DAA. The final Division/Class 
assigned to the system will be used to isolate the appropriate section of the evaluation 
criteria in the TCSEC, (which is organized by Division/Class).

Later in Chapter 5 of this document we will address specific protection topics in the 
TCSEC. The paragraph will be used that corresponds to the Division/Class being 
supported in this procurement. Chapter 5 will identify both Division/Class and the 
corresponding TCSEC paragraph number to assist the procurement initiator in 
construction of the RFP.

Figure 2-2 Procurement Initiator Guidance



Working with acquisition personnel, the procurement initiators should consult this 
guideline using the Division/Class selected for the system. The specification language 
contained in or referenced by this guideline can be applied directly to selected features 
and assurances. The statements can be amplified to meet specific operational 
requirements. Procurement initiators and acquisition personnel must ensure that the 
security specifications and work statements in Section C of the RFP allow EPL 
solutions, do not preclude other solutions, and are compliant with the DAA's 
accreditation requirements. NSA is eager to help in this determination. The 
requirements of the TCSEC will be carried through the development life-cycle of the 
system: RFP, contract, test, certification, and accreditation.

3	REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL

The Request for Proposal (RFP) is the focus of this procurement guideline series. A 
standard RFP has thirteen sections, each designated by a letter of the alphabet (see Table 
3-1). The procurement initiator provides input to and review of all of these sections. The 
majority of the procedural information is controlled directly by the procurement 
activity. Security relevant sections important to the procurement initiator and addressed 
in the remainder of this document are highlighted.



Table 3-1 RFP Organization

Letter

Section Title

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K



L

M

Solicitation/Contract Form, Standard Form 33

Supplies or Services with Prices and Costs

Descriptions/Specifications/Statements of Work

Packaging and Marking

Inspection and Acceptance

Deliveries and Performance

Contract Administration Data

Special Contract Requirements

Contract Clauses

List of Documents, Exhibits and Other Attachments

Representations, Certifications and Other Statements 

of Offerors or Quoters

Instructions, Conditions, and Notices to Offerors

Evaluation Factors for Award

3.1	SECTION C - DESCRIPTIONS/SPECIFICATIONS

The first part of Section C describes the technical requirements to the offeror, including 
the security requirements. The section is mission user-oriented, and will normally 
contain a Specifications or Requirements section that lays out the features and 
capabilities to be included in the system to satisfy mission security requirements. This 
guideline has consolidated the security functionality requirements of the TCSEC. This 
will be addressed in detail in Chapter 5.

3.2	SECTION C - STATEMENTS OF WORK (SOW)

The second part of Section C identifies the specific tasks the contractor will perform 
during the contract period and include security related tasking. The SOW could include 
tasks such as system engineering, design, and build. For security, Statements of Work 
include contractor tasking necessary to achieve specific levels of assurance, including 
studies and analyses, configuration management, security test and evaluation support, 
delivery, and maintenance of the trusted system. These work statements also specify the 
development of the required documentation to be provided under the Contract Data 
Requirements Lists (CDRLs). This will be addressed in detail in Chapter 5.

3.3	SECTION F - DELIVERIES AND PERFORMANCE

This section covers delivery and installation requirements. Special delivery 
requirements as specified in the TCSEC need to be included. Performance requirements 
for the trusted system will also be discussed. This section will be addressed further in 
Chapter 5 of this guideline.

3.4	SECTION H - SPECIAL CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS

This section of the solicitation contains clauses that are specially tailored for each 
acquisition. Typical topics covered include: site access and preparation, data rights, 
maintenance, liquidated damages, and training responsibilities. Although these are not 
addressed specifically in this guideline, they are often topics of concern to the 
procurement initiator of trusted systems.

3.5	SECTION J - LIST OF DOCUMENTS, EXHIBITS, AND OTHER 
ATTACHMENTS

This section contains a list of documents, exhibits, attachments, and other forms used to 
build and execute the RFP. There are usually a series of attachments, each one dedicated 
to a list of specific items. Attachments addressed by this guideline series include the 
following:

a. The Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL), referencing specific Data Item Descrip-
tion (DID) requirements are provided in Volume 3 of this guideline series and also refer-
enced in RFP Attachment A contained in the Chapter 5 standard presentation of this doc-
ument. Each SOW task is linked to one or more CDRLs; each CDRL identifies a docu-
ment or other data that the offeror is required to deliver, along with specific information 
about that document (e.g.   schedule, number   and frequency of revisions, distribution). 
Associated with each CDRL is a Data Item Description (DID) that specifies the docu-
ment's content and format. Where requirements differ, there are unique DIDs for each 
Division/Class.

b. Even though it is presented separately, the glossary is an important part of the Specifi-
cations and the Statements of Work because it precisely defines terms and further clari-
fies the language intent. The glossary is included as RFP Attachment B in Chapter 5 of 
this guideline.

c. Acronyms used in the RFP must be defined in their first use and must also be identi-
fied in the accompanying acronym list. Acronyms are included as RFP Attachment C in 
the Chapter 5 in this guideline.

d. References have been identified for incorporation into the RFP. Terms are compatible 
with and support the specification language, and as such, become an integral part of an 
RFP. The references are for technically supporting information and should not be inter-
preted as requirements. References are included as RFP Attachment D in Chapter 5 of 
this guideline.

3.6	SECTION L - INSTRUCTIONS, CONDITIONS, AND NOTICES TO 
OFFERORS

This section contains the instructions and conditions of the acquisition. It informs 
Offerors of their actions and responsibilities, if they are planning to submit a proposal. It 
covers such things as proposal format, oral presentations, and the proposal preparation 
instructions. Proposal preparation instructions can be used to an advantage by requiring 
the Offerors to submit outlines of how they will conduct SOW tasking. This will assist in 
understanding the Offeror's technical approach and allow assessment of their 
understanding of the technical requirements. This will be addressed in detail in Chapter 
5 of this guideline.

3.7	SECTION M - EVALUATION FACTORS FOR AWARD

This presents to the bidder the basis of award and how proposals will be evaluated. It 
should be taken from the Government's proposal evaluation criteria, addressed in 
Volume 4 of the procurement guideline series.



















THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

4	OTHER CONSIDERATIONS

There are other important factors to consider before the RFP language is presented.

4.1	NONMANDATORY REQUIREMENTS AND OPTIONS

An alternative for procurement initiators is to specify non-mandatory requirements. 
These requirements are placed in the RFP. The bidder may respond to these 
requirements or choose not to respond. The bidder will not be penalized for not 
responding or for proposing an unacceptable response. The bidder can, however, gain 
points if the approach is deemed acceptable by the evaluators.

Non-mandatory requirements and solutions can also be proposed by the bidder if this is 
allowed by the RFP. Again bidders will not be penalized for not proposing non-
mandatory requirements, for proposing unacceptable requirements, for proposing 
unacceptable solutions, or for proposing unacceptable desirable options or features. 
They can gain points by proposing acceptable solutions to acceptable requirements, 
whether these requirements become part of the contract or not.

Options are requirements that may be proposed by the Government, but ones that may 
not be intended to be purchased at the same time as the rest of the features. The 
Government may still want these options addressed in the proposal and evaluated as if 
they were mandatory requirements.

4.2	EVIDENCE AVAILABILITY

Just because a vendor supplies NSA with evidence to support a product evaluation, does 
not necessarily mean the Government has rights to that documentation. In order to 
obtain certification evidence, even the identical documents provided for product 
evaluation, the Government must task the development of the documentation in the 
Statement of Work and delivery in the CDRL. Of course, only that documentation that is 
required for certification and operation should be specified.

4.3	DOCUMENTATION COST

The cost for operational security documentation (e.g. Security Feature User's Guide and 
Trusted Facility Manual) can be incurred within the contract or directly by the 
Government. A contract cost is incurred if the operational security documentation is 
specifically called out in the RFP and therefore generated to Government standards by 
the offeror. The cost would be incurred directly by the Government if the acquiring 
agency Program Manager intends to develop the documentation internally. This makes 
the system appear less expensive. Unfortunately, users seldom have the experience and 
expertise necessary to generate this unique type of documentation. This can lead to cost 
growth manifested in contract Engineering Change Proposals (ECPs).

4.4	INTERPRETING THE TCSEC

The philosophy of this document is to present the words of the TCSEC in a suitable form 
for the RFP and then place the responsibility for additions and changes in the hands of 
the procurement initiator, all the while warning of the pitfalls. The best approach is for 
the initiator to propose changes and have them reviewed by NSA, or some other 
equivalent security organization, to assess potential impact. Care must be taken not to 
restrict potentially valid solutions when writing the specification or statement of work 
sections of the RFP.

The features and assurances for a given TCSEC Division/Class are inseparable. If 
requirements or taskings are eliminated from a specific level of trust, then that level 
cannot be certified. If requirements are added, existing EPL solutions could be 
eliminated.

The Trusted Computing Base (TCB) is the totality of protection mechanisms, hardware, 
software and/or firmware, the collection of which is responsible for enforcing security. 
The TCB is the trusted part, but not necessarily the total, of the offeror's solution.

5	STANDARD SOLICITATION LANGUAGE

To assist the reader, the paragraph numbering that follows is as one might expect to find 
it in the RFP. This chapter identifies the language to be used in selected, identified 
sections of the RFP. The paragraphing gets more difficult when there are multiple 
policies (DOCPs).

Certain conventions are used in this chapter. The words in bold are either words 
intended for use in the RFP or references to words intended for use in the RFP. For 
example, bold paragraphs normally reference specific paragraphs of DoD 5200. 28-STD 
that are suggested for use verbatim in the RFP document. Paragraphs applicable to only 
a Division/Class range will have that range in parentheses prior to the paragraph or 
group of paragraphs. Paragraphs in which the Division/Class are absent are applicable 
to all Divisions/Classes (C2 - A1).

Paragraph designation is complicated and will be explained here. The basis for (but not 
the actual) paragraph numbering is as follows:

C.m.n.p.q

C.		Section C of the RFP

m.		Applicable DOCP number designator

n.		n=1 Scope of Contract, n = 2 Operational Specifications, n = 3 TCSEC 

		Specifications, n = 4 TCSEC Statements of Work

p.		Number of topic taken from TCSEC

q.		Item of concern for procurement initiator

In the Section C of this document, for use by the procurement initiator, section m will be 
omitted because it is strictly an operational determination. Items of concern for the 
procurement initiator in Section C, paragraph q above, are divided into paragraphs as 
follows:

a. Scope of Contract (n=1), Operational Specification (n = 2), Text of the Specification 
(n = 3), or Statement of Work (n = 4) - Taken primarily from the TCSEC, these are 
words or references to words suggested for inclusion in the RFP. (This will be a repeat 
of the currently published Volume 2 Guideline.) This is always applicable and is in bold.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation - Interface policy of this DOCP with respect to 
every other communicating DOCP shall be presented. This shall represent operational 
policy for this development determined by the DAA and through agreements with other 
DAAs.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation - Global policy imposed on this and all other 
DOCPs shall be presented here. It shall be the operational policy for this procurement 
and represent agreements with other parts of evolving systems. This is applicable when 
there is a complex system and the requirement cannot be totally satisfied with the TDI.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation - References to interpretations and other applicable in-
formation contained in the TNI document. Applicable to simple (single NTCB) systems 
or systems where the TNI is applicable to one or more of the TCBs of a complex sys-
tem.

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation - References to interpretations and other 
applicable information contained in the TDI document. Applicable to complex systems 
where it has been determined to follow the approach of the TDI. Also applicable to a 
complex system in which one or more of the DOCPs have been or are to be built under 
the guidelines of the TDI.

f. Important References - These references should be included in the RFP. They are gen-
erally guidelines intended to explain and interpret the TCSEC for the bidder. These refer-
ences will redundantly be contained in the list of references accompanying the RFP. It 
is important to emphasize that even though these references are bold and will be 
contained in the RFP, they are not RFP requirements.

g. Procurement Considerations - Here, issues are discussed that have arisen in previous 
procurements or are apt to arise in future procurements. These issues should be consid-
ered by the procurement initiator in the context of his/her particular procurement to cir-
cumvent possible later contractual or certification problems. These considerations are 
not complete, but offer guidance based on known experiences. They are not in bold and 
therefore we do not intend their inclusion in the RFP.

In the section C being constructed by the procurement initiator, his/her paragraphing 
will be C.m.n.p.q where the q are subsections:

a. Text of the Specification/Statement of Work

b. Interpretation (Not to be considered as a requirement)

c. References (Not to be considered as a requirement)

The standard language and form for the trusted elements of a secure system, along with 
important discussion, are provided in the remainder of this chapter, organized 
according to a subset of the sections of the RFP.

SECTION C - DESCRIPTION/SPECIFICATION/WORK STATEMENT

C.1	SCOPE OF CONTRACT (AUTOMATED INFORMATION SYSTEM - EQUIP-
MENT, SOFTWARE AND MAINTENANCE)

The Contractor shall furnish the equipment, software, documentation, and other 
contractor work required for installation and support of all items supplied under this 
contract. Such items shall be supplied in conformance with the terms and conditions of 
the contract.

C.2	OPERATIONAL SECURITY SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

The bidder shall considered and/or recommend security support other than 
COMPUSEC, especially physical security, TEMPEST and COMSEC that shall also be 
used to protect the system.

The system shall be shown to be compatible with all operational security requirements 
identified, ensuring that there is nothing in the design of the proposed solution to 
preclude their satisfaction.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(Note: First time readers should skip to section g below for a background on what is 
discussed here.)

Interface Policy - Policy established for control of data flow between each pair of 
communicating DOCPs.

Operational requirements pertain, not only to portions of the system being procured, but 
also for interfacing parts of the system, meaning all existing TCB subsets or DOCPs. This 
requires addressing boundaries, physical interfaces, and policy interfaces.

There shall be an explicit interface policy considered between each DOCP and every 
other DOCP with which it communicates. The interface policy can be thought of as an 
augmentation to the exportation policy of the TCSEC, however, in many cases, both 
exportation and importation concerns are expressed. The need for a trusted path to share 
and mediate security variables also should be assessed. In sending data, a DOCP must 
support intercommunication (exporting) policies established by its division/class.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

Global Policy - System level requirements to be satisfied by each DOCP (e.g., audit, 
recovery, and identification/authentication.)

Global considerations pertain to systems for which there can be or has been no 
accreditation against a well defined global policy such as that stated in the TDI. If TCBs 
share mechanisms (e. g., identification/authentication or audit) each individual TCB 
must be certified alone, using that mechanism. The DAA must use the evidence from 
those certifications to ensure consistency with interface policy between the entities and 
any less primitive policy of which this shared mechanism is a part.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

The decision may be made to use the TNI as the basis for development of one or more 
DOCP. This decision is made and documented initially as operational security policy 
with the appropriate DOCP, n-tuple, interface policy and global policies developed. 
Actual interpretations for use in the RFP are referenced in subsequent specifications and 
statements of work sections of this document.

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

The decision may be made to use the TDI as the basis for development of one or more 
DOCP. This decision is made and documented initially as operational security policy 
with the appropriate DOCP, n-tuple, interface policy and global policies developed. 
Actual interpretations for use in the RFP are referenced in subsequent specifications and 
statements of work sections of this document.

f. Important References

"Use of the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) for Complex, 
Evolving, Multipolicy Systems," NCSC-Technical Report-002, and "Turning Multiple 
Evaluated Products Into Trusted Systems," NCSC-Technical Report-003.

g. Operational Security Considerations

Terms are introduced that must be understood to understand the DOCP concepts:

Regulatory/Security Policy - Regulations, Directives, and Standards imposed on the 
development of secure systems. Especially DoDD 5200.28, DoD 5200.28-STD, and DoD 
5200.28-M (DRAFT) and regulations developed by individual Agencies and 
Organizations to satisfy the requirements of those DoD documents.

Operational Security Policy - Design and operational choices that satisfy regulatory 
security policy. It includes established DOCPs, security parameters (n-tuples), and 
security rules of operation.

Domains of Constant Policy (DOCPs) - Unique pieces of the system, each with a single 
policy and an associated TCB. DOCPs are, in general, non-overlapping subsets of the 
system, that, in combination, completely cover the system. A DOCP consists of a well-
defined boundary (where an isolation mechanism exists or can be employed) and an n-
tuple defining security characteristics. (The isolation is required to ensure that 
communications is taking place only over known, designated channels.) Each DOCP 
will have a TCB for support of its own security requirements, however, some of the 
mechanisms (e.g., audit) may be shared with another DOCP. (This is the only exception 
to the non-overlapping principal.)

Operational Security Parameter - Values and relations having a security relationship 
determined by the procurement initiator and the DAA to be requirements imposed on 
the system design. They include n-tuples. A partial list (excluding n-tuples) includes:

·	statement of operational positions and responsibilities of each associated with security,

·	statement concerning the intended frequency of mechanism integrity checking during op-
erations,

·	minimum audit functionality to be supported at all times, plus other increasing levels of 
audit support and rules for their use,

·	maximum number of users,

·	intended hours of operations,

·	hard copy output,

·	environment for Software Development.

N-tuples - Operational security policy parameters associated with a DOCP used to 
eventually determine division/class. "n" might be different for different procurements. 
At least one value of "n" is different for different DOCPs. The n-tuple that represents 
operational policy can be simple (clearance and classification levels) or complicated 
(with categories and other parameters). For the purposes of this document, the n-tuple 
parameters considered to be basic are values of the parameters:

·	minimum classification of data,

·	maximum classification of data,

·	minimum security clearance,

·	maximum security clearance,

·	categories (compartments/caveats),

·	build status (existing, EPL product, to be built), and

·	level of assurance achieved (e.g., EPL evaluation at some level, certification evaluation 
at some level, no evaluation, or other).

Those n-tuple parameters considered to be derived are:

·	risk index,

·	

·	exposed risk index,

·	

·	mode, and

·	

·	division/class.

Thus in this case n = 11, where 7 are basic and 4 derived.

(1) Background



For a simple system where development is only guided by the TCSEC, there is a single 
set of operational parameter values used to determine a single division/class. Similarly, 
in a system designed against the TNI, a single division/class is determined.

When we are dealing with TDI, there are the same single set of operational parameters 
for each TCB subset considered, though the values may be different for each subset. 
Because of the subset relation, one least primitive subset represents the system from the 
outside world. The same is true for DOCPs in which for a given complex system the size 
and definition of the n-tuple parameters are the same across the system, but the values 
taken on by the n-tuple parameters will be different for different DOCPs. Therefore, the 
division/class is probably different as well.

(2) Domains of Constant Policy

The approach is used when any or all of the following system characteristics exist: a) 
complex - the system is made up of systems, b) evolving - part of the system exists and 
the rest of the system is being added, and c) multipolicy - different parts of the system 
can have different policies (i.e., applicable division/class).

Divide the complex system into pieces, addressing each piece, like simple systems are 
now treated with the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC). Each 
piece, called a domain of constant policy (DOCP), has a single policy (division/class) 
supported by a single TCB.

Determine division/class using DoDD 5200.28, Enclosure 4. Using the DOCP's 
associated n-tuple (n operational security policy parameters such as clearances and 
classifications), a risk index is identified, subject to modification by the Designated 
Approving Authority (DAA).

Connected DOCPs are subject to cascading risk, requiring a search that considers each 
pair of potentially intercommunicating DOCPs. Identified risk increases can result in an 
increased risk index, called exposed risk index. This is a primary factor to determine 
DOCP division/class. Risk contributing DOCPs are candidates for operational policy 
changes or added mechanisms.

Optimal operational policy is determined through requirement and design iteration 
(e.g., seeking lowest affordable risk) and DOCPs are assigned an updated division/class. 
An interface policy is developed, constraining communications to conform to all security 
policies, including local policies (e.g., two man rule) and mutual suspicion. Global policy 
is developed across DOCPs, consistent and mutually supportive in areas such as 
identification/authentication, audit, and trusted recovery.

(3) Risk Assessment

Exposed Risk Index - An adjusted risk index for a DOCP determined from DoDD 
5200.28 [4], Enclosure 4, that considers exposure (cascading risk) from other DOCPs.

Contributed Risk - The summed amount of increase in exposed risk potentially 
contributed by a single DOCP to all other DOCPs. Two DOCPs could potentially 
increase the risk index of a third DOCP from its original level (i.e., providing an exposed 
risk index), but in the analysis technique, only one of the contributing DOCPs actually 
does. Nevertheless, each of the contributing DOCPs receives an increase in contributed 
risk.

Solely Contributed Risk - The risk contributed by a DOCP which could not have also 
been contributed by another, summed across all other potentially contributing DOCPs.

A DOCP and its n-tuple are working entities in the sense that tradeoff decisions 
concerning policy, costs, and mechanisms may make it necessary to change the 
operational policy (i.e., the DOCPs and their characteristics). It is only after these 
adjustments are completed that the derived policy parameters (exposed risk, mode, and 
TCSEC division/class) are finalized. (Many of the concepts of propagated risk were 
referenced in NCSC-Technical Report-002.)

A small part of the risk management process for simple systems is the risk assessment 
procedure identified in DoDD 5200.28, Enclosure 4, that identifies a risk index using 
some of the operational security policy, with other considerations, to guide the DAA in 
making adjustments. The same procedure is used for DOCPs with the exception that the 
cascading risk from intercommunicating DOCPs is also taken into account. Exposure is 
represented by changes to the operational security parameters (levels or clearances) 
before enclosure 4 is applied. The exposed risk is a new risk index value called the 
exposed risk index.

Contributed risk is the summed amount of increase in exposed risk potentially 
contributed by a single DOCP to all other DOCPs. (Two or more DOCPs could have 
potentially changed the risk level of yet another DOCP from its original level, but in the 
analysis technique, only one actually does. Nevertheless, they all receive an increase in 
contributed risk). Solely contributed risk is the risk contributed by one DOCP which 
could not have been also contributed by another DOCP.

The exposed risk can be decreased by changing either the local operational policies or 
the operational policies of the contributing DOCP(s). The contributed risk factors, are an 
indicator to the DAA where the changing of policy or the implementation of guards may 
do the most good in reducing the risk of the overall system. This is all done before 
mechanisms are considered, thus, as you might guess, this is the first of two iterations. 
The two contributed risk factors (contributed risk and solely contribute risk) help 
identify to the DAA the areas where changes in operational policy can have the largest 
risk reduction advantage. The propagated risk assessment is repeated to assess the 
shared risk aspects of the adjustments.

(4) Protection Assessment

With the operational policy (DOCPs and n-tuples), interface policy, and global policy 
established, design can be accomplished based on the division/classes chosen. Upgrades 
to existing architectures will probably involve providing mechanisms to support the 
global and interface policies. System and TCB isolation may need to be enhanced. 
Compensation for previously ignored exposed risk may involve manual or automated 
guards and strict interface control. Some mechanisms may be replaced to take advantage 
of technology advances. New and replacement designs will take advantage of EPL 
products where possible.

Besides protection mechanism assessment, there needs to be an assessment of assurance. 
This includes determining the evaluation rigor used, or planned to be used, in testing 
and evaluating the DOCP. In both upgrade and new systems with EPL products, a 
strategy for certification evaluation must be developed that maximizes the use of prior 
evidence, while not diminishing the quality of the assurance.

It is at this point a second iterative analysis should be undertaken to take into account 
the success of the proposed mechanisms in meeting the regulatory and operational 
security policy. It allows reexamination of the process all the way back to the 
specification of operational policy. The two contributed risk factors (i.e., contributed risk 
and solely contributed risk) again help identify to the DAA the areas where changes in 
operational policy can have the largest risk and cost reduction advantage. The protection 
assessment can be re-accomplished considering actual architectural solutions. What 
remains is a statement of the residual risk within the system. The DAA must determine 
the acceptability of the risk, and, if required, the process must be reviewed and 
corrected.

The results of this second iterative analysis may result in updates to the operational 
security policy and security architectural design. At this point, new development may 
begin. The operational security policy is used along with regulatory security policy as a 
basis for certification and accreditation.

C.3	TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

Detailed technical specifications are found in this section. The glossary and acronyms 
referenced in Section J and attached to this RFP are considered to be part of this 
specification.

(For single policy systems, this section should be traversed once using a single division/
class. If the TNI is being used in as an interpretation to the TCSEC, then the appropriate 
division/class entry for the TNI should be considered. If a multipolicy system is being 
specified, then either the TDI or DOCP will be used. For the TDI, there must be a 
specification for each TCB subset and a set of corresponding TCSEC specifications, as 
well as consideration of the appropriate TDI interpretations for the determined 
division/class. Similarly, if the DOCP approach is being used, then the Interface and 
Global Policy Specifications must be identified.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

A DOCP has two interface responsibilities: 1) it must ensure that data it sends continues 
to be supported by the policies imposed on it and 2) it must appropriately handle data it 
receives based on any policy information known about that data.

The policy can be discretionary and/or mandatory and includes categories 
(compartments, caveats, need to know). The responsibility for establishing the policy, 
linking it to the data, and assuring proper understanding by the receiver is required of 
the sender. Policy can be preestablished based on data identification through DOCP 
agreements, it can be communicated via labels, or it can be communicated and 
implemented manually by security administrators.

Sending DOCPs must be assured that data is being released into a system that can be 
trusted to interpret and carry out the policy. Factors to consider include the potential for 
eavesdropping, spoofing, or policy alteration.

Once data is in the possession of a receiving DOCP, it becomes the responsibility of that 
TCB to impose its knowledge of the policy on that data and treat it accordingly. 
Suspected or actual violations of interface policy must be treated as a special case and 
the data protected.

A DOCP may not be affordably and certifiably able to support division/class increases 
determined by considering exposed risk. Special communications mechanisms or added 
protection features within the potential receiving DOCP may help to ameliorate this 
situation (i.e., decrease the exposed risk). This can provide an operational solution that 
must be agreed to by the potentially sending DOCP. In any case, the DAA from the 
sending DOCP ultimately has responsibility for the decision.

In a policy of mutual suspicion, a sending DOCP must establish interface policy 
consistent with the level of trust it has established for potential receiving DOCPs. If the 
level of trust determined does not coincide with the certification and/or accreditation 
level given that DOCP, the sending DOCP should further restrict the communication 
policy, beyond that normally implied by the TCSEC and its interpretations to a level 
where the sending DOCP is willing to accept the remaining risk. Similarly, if a receiving 
DOCP cannot trust the content or policy associated with data provided by another 
DOCP, then a receipt and handling policy must be established consistent with the risk 
the receiving DOCP is willing to accept. This policy may be more restrictive than that 
required by the TCSEC and its interpretations.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

To be secure, either there shall be no sharing between DOCPs of discretionary controlled 
data, the entire connected system should satisfy a single previously established 
discretionary access control policy, it must be accomplished by sharing access control 
mechanisms, or DOCPs must share access control information between mechanisms, 
ensuring a secure protection and a system that cannot be defeated because of time lags 
and communications threats. In older systems that do not allow subjects to access objects 
in other systems, this requirement is often satisfied because only standard messages are 
formatted and allowed to be transmitted. In these cases the subjects do not have access to 
objects beyond the scope of their own TCB.

Even if each TCB has its own data for identification and authentication, the information 
for individual users that may potentially request access in more than one TCB or may 
have access to objects in more than one TCB, must be consistent. The individual cannot 
assume more than one identity or be performing two functions simultaneously (unless 
the system security has accounted for such support). There must be a way to associate 
audit records generated by different TCBs for the same Individual subject.

Someone must be assigned the authority and assume the responsibility of security 
administrator for each of the TCBs. In addition, a security administrator must represent 
the authority of each hierarchical stage of DAAs.

Implications of failure of one of the component TCBs must be reviewed from the 
standpoint of impact to all of the other intercommunicating entities. A way to 
cooperatively shut down and recover in a secure manner must exist.

TCBs following the subsetted TCB principles set forth by the TDI need not be concerned 
with additional interface and global policies beyond those stated within the TDI.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

The specific Trusted Network Interpretations to topics of the Trusted Computer System 
Evaluation Criteria are referenced in their entirety in the specifications and statements of 
work.

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

The specific Trusted Database Management System Interpretations to topics of the 
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria are referenced in their entirety in the 
specifications and statements of work.

f. Important References

"Use of the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) for Complex, 
Evolving, Multipolicy Systems," (NCSC-Technical Report-002). Also, "Turning Multiple 
Evaluated Products Into Trusted Systems," (NCSC-Technical Report-003).

g. Technical Specifications Considerations

(None)

C.3.1	DISCRETIONARY ACCESS CONTROL SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.1.1.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.1.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.1.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.1.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.1.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The interface policy for discretionary access control depends greatly on the specific 
implementation. If the objects involved remain under strict control of the single TCB 
(i.e., DOCP) and are not passed on to other DOCPs, The policy can be shown to be 
satisfied. If the object contents are shared, then communicating DOCPs must also 
support the policy. If the policy remains constant, then this can be handled procedurally. 
The most difficult situation is that in which the discretionary policy varies, that is the 
access control matrix is updated and that result must be updated in one, several, or all 
DOCPs over a trusted path.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

The alternative to a complicated interface policy is to define a global policy that can be 
shown to be supported by each of the DOCP TCBs. Further, through the discretionary 
policy, the positions of access of each of the subjects can be controlled. Again this may be 
a solution for an existing, evolving system, but is less desirable for a multi user, general 
purpose system using object oriented sophisticated off-the-shelf software capabilities.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.1.1 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.1.1 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.1 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.1 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.1 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.1 and IR-2.1.1 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-1.1 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-1.1 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.1 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.1 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.1 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-003, "A Guide to Understanding Discretionary Access Control in Trusted 
Systems," September 30, 1987.

g. Discretionary Access Control Procurement Considerations

Unauthorized users include both those not authorized to use the system and legitimate 
users not authorized to access a specific piece of information being protected.

"Users" do not include "operators," "system programmers," "Security Officers," and 
other system support personnel. The latter are distinct from users and are subject to the 
Trusted Facility Management and the System Architecture requirements.

Deletion of subjects (e.g., users) and objects (e.g., data) is a potential problem. The 
mechanism should handle the deletion effectively, making certain that dangling 
references do not grant unintended access.

The ability to assign access permissions to an object by a user should be controlled with 
the same precision as the ability to access the objects themselves. Four basic models for 
control exist: hierarchical, concept of ownership, laissez-faire, and centralized. These are 
discussed in NCSC-TG-003.

The TCB should enforce need-to-know access restrictions placed on information 
managed by the information system. The need-to-know access restrictions for the 
information, when created or changed, should be determined by the office of primary 
responsibility or the originator of the information. Only users determined to have 
appropriate clearances in addition to required "need-to-know" for information should 
be allowed to access the information.

The design must consider that discretionary access control is usually used for both user 
access control and system access control. For example, the system may contain several 
types of objects (known as public objects) that are designed to be read by all users, or 
executed by all users, but allowing only trusted subjects modification privileges.

Discretionary access control will not stop Trojan horses. An attacker can trick a more 
privileged user to run a program containing his Trojan horse, that in turn copies the user 
access files to the attackers address space. Trojan horses are addressed in NCSC-TG-003.

The Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) systems may vary with respect to the granularity 
of objects to which discretionary access control is applied. Generally, they are organized 
to provide Discretionary Access Control (DAC) at the file level or at the application 
level. Database design can often handle the cases when a different level of granularity is 
desired by the procuring agency so that EPL products can apply. The procuring agency 
should take particular care, whenever possible, to write RFP specifications for DAC that 
can be met by at least some existing commercially available products. (This is further 
addressed in Volume 1, Chapter 3)

C.3.2	OBJECT REUSE SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be considered by the procurement initiator in the specification portion of the RFP 
verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.1.2.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.2.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.2.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.2.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.2.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

Since, by definition, there is no part of the system which is not a part of a DOCP, a 
physical interconnection is either part of the DOCP at one end of the connection or at the 
other end of the connection or it is a DOCP all by itself. Therefore, storage objects must 
meet the requirements of the corresponding division/class and therefore its object reuse 
requirements.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.1.2 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.1.2 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.2 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.2 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.2 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.2 and IR-2.1.2 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-1.2 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-1.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.2 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.2 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.2 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-025, "A Guide to Understanding Data Remanence in Automated Information 
Systems," September 1991.

NCSC-TG-018, "A Guide to Understanding Object Reuse in Trusted Systems," July, 
1992.

g. Object Reuse Procurement Considerations

The purpose of object reuse mechanisms is to prevent disclosure of sensitive information 
by ensuring that residual information is no longer available. This objective can be 
achieved by clearing objects either upon allocation or deallocation.

Object reuse is a concern when an object is not fully allocated, that is, the granularity is 
larger than the data. The object reuse requirement must be satisfied based on the object 
size, not the data allocation.

C.3.3	LABELS SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be considered by the procurement initiator in the specification portion of the RFP 
verbatim:

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.3.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.3.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.3.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.3.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The interface policy must be implemented so as to satisfy the labels policy directly or by 
demonstrating the equivalence of the implementation. The contents of labels is a subset 
of the information that must accompany data communicated. The solution to an existing 
evolving system may involve use of a trusted path for security interface information. 
Interface data may be required to satisfy the discretionary policy or other special (e.g., 
two man rule) policies, and therefore be required at C2, as well as higher, division/
classes.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.1.3 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.3 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.3 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.3 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.3 and IR-3 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-1.3 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.3 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.3 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.3 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Labels Procurement Considerations

The tranquility principle states that the security level of an object cannot change while 
the object is being processed by a system. The same can be stated about changes to 
security clearances. This is a critical area, both from the standpoint of changes only being 
invocable by an authorized individual under the direct control of the TCB, and ensuring 
the system cannot be spoofed when such changes are being made.

Labeling of data is not used solely to control classified information. The mandatory 
policy can also be used for unclassified sensitive or privacy applications.

A distinction must be made between objects that are explicitly labeled and those that are 
implicitly labeled. For example, a labeled file may contain many tuples or records 
mediated by the reference monitor.

Internal TCB variables that are not visible to untrusted subjects need not be labeled, 
provided they are not directly or indirectly accessible by subjects external to the TCB. 
However, it is important to understand that such internal variables can function as 
covert signaling channels when untrusted subjects are able to detect changes in these 
variables by observing system behavior.

C.3.4	LABEL INTEGRITY SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.3.1.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.3.1.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.3.1.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.3.1.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The integrity requirement applies to any interface information transmitted to define 
physical and logical interface.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

Shared label interpretation between DOCPs must be identical through use of identical 
labels and software or through carefully planned transformations that can be shown to 
provide identical interpretation results.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.1.3.1 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.3.1 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.3.1 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.3.1 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.3 and IR-3 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-1.3.1 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.3.1 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.3.1 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.3.1 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Label Integrity Procurement Considerations

Care is needed when specifying the means of binding an object and its label. A 
cryptographic mechanism is one of many approaches adequate to provide assurance of 
the binding since the relationship and content are preserved, and there is protection 
from disclosure.

The form of internal sensitivity labels may differ from their external (exported) form, but 
the meaning must be retained.

C.3.5	EXPORTATION OF LABELED INFORMATION SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.3.2.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.3.2.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.3.2.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.3.2.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The exportation requirement should be satisfied as part of the interface policy 
requirement. Depending on the discretionary policy and other policy requirements, 
special designation of a channel or device may go beyond the single-level, multi-level 
considerations. Shared channels or devices must consider security of one DOCP with 
respect to the co-using DOCPs.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

Labels and label interpretation between DOCPs shall be identical or transformed to 
provide identical interpretation.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.1.3.2 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.3.2 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.3.2 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.3.2 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.3 and IR-3 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-1.3.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.3.2 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.3.2 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.3.2 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Exportation of Labeled Information Procurement Considerations

Changes in designation should be made by a properly authorized individual, normally 
the System Administrator, considering the tranquility principle. Such changes are 
auditable.

C.3.6	EXPORTATION TO MULTI LEVEL DEVICES SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.3.2.1.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.3.2.1.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.3.2.1.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.3.2.1.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The interface policy shall support the multilevel exportation device specification. A 
device supported by more than one DOCP shall be shown to satisfy the requirements of 
each DOCP while simultaneously supporting the requirements of the others. The 
solution may involve use of isolation mechanisms with different dedicated modes 
depending on the DOCP.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

A global policy involving the unique assignment of devices to a single DOCP at one time 
might be considered as a feasible solution.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.1.3.2.1 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.3.2.1 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.3.2.1 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.3.2.1 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.3.2 and IR-3 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-1.3.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.3.2 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.3.2 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.3.2 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Exportation to Multilevel Devices Procurement Considerations

The sensitivity label of an object imported to a multilevel device must be within the 
range of the device and considered to be accurate by the TCB. It is considered to be 
accurate because it has been protected by the security mechanisms of the environment 
through which it has traversed before it reaches the multilevel device.

C.3.7	EXPORTATION TO SINGLE LEVEL DEVICES SPECIFICATIONS

a.   Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.3.2.2.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.3.2.2.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.3.2.2.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.3.2.2.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The interface policy shall support the single-level exportation device specification. A 
device supported by more than one DOCP shall be shown to satisfy the requirements of 
each DOCP while simultaneously supporting the requirements of the others. The 
solution may involve use of isolation mechanisms with different dedicated modes 
depending on the DOCP.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

A global policy involving the unique assignment of devices to a single DOCP at one time 
might be considered as a feasible solution.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.1.3.2.2 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.3.2.2 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.3.2.2 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.3.2.2 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.3 and IR-3 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-1.3.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.3.2 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.3.2 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.3.2 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Exportation to Single-level Devices Procurement Considerations

Sometimes operational use of a single level device is actually to be at one level for a 
period of time and then to switch to another level. Here it is wise to employ labels. If 
labels are not used then tranquility must be observed during configuration changes with 
a positive action to ensure the level of the device is known to users and observed by the 
reference validation mechanism.

C.3.8	LABELING HUMAN-READABLE OUTPUT SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.3.2.3.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.3.2.3.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.3.2.3.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.3.2.3.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

Where the data is formatted for a human readable output device, the human-readable 
output requirement shall be included as part of the interface policy requirement.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

DOCPs receiving data in human-readable output form shall be expected to be formatted 
for human-readable output with classification, category and caveat markings.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.1.3.2.3 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.3.2.3 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.3.2.3 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.3.2.3 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.3 and IR-3 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-1.3.2.3 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.3.2.3 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.3.2.3 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.3.2.3 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Labeling Human-Readable Output Procurement Considerations

The System Administrator specifies the printed or displayed sensitivity label that is to be 
associated with exported information. The TCB is required to mark the beginning and 
end of all human-readable, paged, hard-copy output with sensitivity labels that properly 
represent the sensitivity of the output. This helps users protect data they are using.

C.3.9	SUBJECT SENSITIVITY LABELS SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.3.3.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.3.3.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.3.3.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The interface policy shall identify when one DOCP has the capability for change in the 
security level associated with a user and requires action or notification of that user by 
another DOCP.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

At B2 and above, the TCSEC requires the following:

The TCB shall immediately notify a terminal user of each change in the security level 
associated with that user during an interactive session. A terminal user shall be able to 
query the TCB as desired for a display of the subject's complete sensitivity level.

For complex systems, the user interface could be to a DOCP that does not support a 
mandatory access control policy. Thus, a change noted by a DOCP that does support 
such a policy would have to be relayed to the user, possibly through cooperative action 
of the full sequence of DOCPs. Similarly, a request by a terminal user for the complete 
sensitivity level could be initially received by a DOCP that does not support a 
mandatory access control policy and will require cooperation between DOCPs to 
determine the complete subject sensitivity level and to provide that information to the 
requesting user.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.3.3 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.3.3 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.3.3 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.3 and IR-3 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.3.3 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.3.3 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.3.3 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Subject Sensitivity Labels Procurement Considerations

(None)

C.3.10	DEVICE LABELS SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.3.4.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.3.4.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.3.4.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

There shall be labels associated with each physically connected DOCP and a label 
associated with each logically connected DOCP. That label shall be used for enforcement 
of the interface policy of the DOCP with respect to each intercommunicating DOCP.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

Labels along with building and interpreting software shall be identical between DOCPs 
or it shall be shown that transformation formats and software produce identical 
interpretation.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.3.4 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.3.4 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.3.4 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.3 and IR-3 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.3.4 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.3.4 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.3.4 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Device Labels Procurement Considerations

(None)

C.3.11	MANDATORY ACCESS CONTROL SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.1.4.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.1.4.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.1.4.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.1.4.

Also Section 9.0 of the TCSEC should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP 
verbatim.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The interface policy shall be shown to uphold the mandatory policy of each DOCP and, 
if different, to be more conservative to account for mutual suspicion.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

Mandatory policy shall support hierarchical classification according to the rules 
established by the Bell-La Padula model. Categories that are defined at one DOCP shall 
be shown to be supported by interpretation software or conservatism in data transmittal 
so that the mandatory policy is shown to be supported throughout the system.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.1.4 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.1.4 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.1.4 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.1.4 and IR-2.1.4 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-1.4 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-1.4 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-1.4 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Mandatory Access Control Procurement Considerations

(None)

C.3.12	IDENTIFICATION AND AUTHENTICATION SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.2.1.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.2.1.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.2.1.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.2.1.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.2.1.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

Trusted paths shall be used at all division classes to provide TCBs to relay authentication 
data. Public key cryptography shall be considered as an isolation mechanism to protect 
authentication data.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

The identification and authentication requirements in the TCSEC address the need to 
correctly associate authorizations with subjects. In a system made of several DOCPs, 

it is possible that only one of several DOCPs will provide identification and 
authentication, which will be used by other DOCPs. Alternatively, identification and 
authentication may be provided directly in more than one DOCP. In either case, the 
DOCPs have to work cooperatively to use identification and authentication data for 
uniquely identifying users and for associating users with auditable actions.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.2.1 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.2.1 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.2.1 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.2.1 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.2.1 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.2.1 and IR-2.2.1 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-2.1 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-2.1 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-2.1 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-2.1 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-2.1 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

CSC-STD-002-85, "Department of Defense (DoD) Password Management Guideline," 
April 12, 1985.

NCSC-TG-017, "A Guide to Understanding Identification and Authentication in Trusted 
Systems," September 1, 1991.

g. Identification and Authentication Procurement Considerations

(This subject is discussed in Volume 1 Chapter 3 of the Procurement Guideline Series.)

Technology has provided techniques and products that vary greatly in terms of reducing 
attack risk while satisfying these requirements. The procurement initiator should ensure 
that the solution that satisfies the requirements is also state-of-the-art in level of 
protection and consistent with the requirements of this particular application.

To be effective, authentication mechanisms must uniquely and unforgeably identify an 
individual. Identification and authentication data is vulnerable to interception by an 
intruder interposed between a user and the TCB. Compromise may result from 
mishandling off-line versions of the data (e.g.,backup files, fault induced system dumps, 
or listings). Even a one-way encrypted file can be compared with an encryption 
dictionary of probable authentication data, if the encryption algorithm and key are 
known.

(B1 - A1) Authorizations include functional roles assigned to individuals. Most roles can 
only be occupied by one person at a time. A role has its own set of authorizations that are 
normally different than the authorizations given to the individuals who can assume the 
role. An individual should not be allowed to assume a role and operate as an individual 
at the same time.

If passwords are to be used, an automatic password generator is strongly recommended. 
If users are allowed to pick their own specific authenticators, their behavior is 
stereotypical enough to permit guessing or reproducing. Password generators are 
available that have been endorsed by NSA and can be obtained as Government off-the-
shelf items.

Password aging is an important consideration that can be enforced administratively or 
by the identification/authentication function.

Smart cards and biometric approaches are effective, especially when they augment a 
password approach.

Whenever the subject is an operating computer program (i.e., a process), that process 
shall be directly associated with just one individual user, i.e., the person being served by 
the process. If the process is a system-owned process (e.g., a background process such as 
a print spooler), the person associated with the process is generally considered to be the 
Security Officer, the System Administrator, or the operator who initiated the process. 
The security level and other subject data that can influence access decisions shall be 
within the range of personnel security clearances associated with the individual user.

C.3.13	TRUSTED PATH SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.2.1.1.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.2.1.1.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.2.1.1.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

At B2, the only required uses of trusted path are login and authentication. At B3 and 
above, occasions "when a positive TCB-to-user connection is required (e.g., login, 
change subject security level)" are included. In both cases, a system designer may choose 
to use trusted path for situations where the security-relevant event could be recognized 
or handled in more than one DOCP subset. On those occasions, the careful coordination 
of all the involved Jacobs in the correct handling of trusted path situations must be 
shown. If a single DOCP implements trusted path and all the invocations of trusted path 
are limited to that DOCP (that is, the flow of control in responding to a trusted path 
initiation never leaves the DOCP until the response is complete), then nothing further 
would be required.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

The description of the limitation of trusted path to a single DOCP will suffice for the 
global part of the requirement, leaving only the demonstration of local satisfaction of the 
requirement by the identified DOCP.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.2.1.1 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.2.1.1 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.2.1.1 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.2 and IR-2.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-2.1.1 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-2.1.1 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-2.1.1 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Trusted Path Procurement Considerations

It is important to note that the intent is to protect identification and authentication data 
at the B2 level, while at the B3 and A1 levels all intercommunications between the TCB 
and the user can be protected.

Technology is providing products that greatly reduce the possibility of successful 
attacks involving the trusted path. The procurement initiator should ensure that the 
solution that satisfies the requirements is also state-of-the-art in level of protection.

C.3.14	AUDIT SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.2.2.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.2.2.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.2.2.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.2.2.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.2.2.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

The interface policy shall accommodate the passage of audit data over a trusted path 
between DOCP`s as may be required by the global policy.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

If each of several DOCPs meets the audit requirements locally, then there is the issue of 
whether the set of audit records meets the requirements of being able to note and record 
individual user actions, and at B3 and above, to be able to initiate required action. If not 
all the DOCPs meet the audit requirements locally, then the requirements must be 
satisfied by the cooperative action of the set of DOCPs. In both cases, consideration of 
the audit characteristics of all the DOCPs has to be part of determining that the entire 
system meets the strictest TCB audit requirements.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.2.2 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.2.2 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.2.2 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.2.2 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.2.2 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.2.2 and IR-2.2.2 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-2.2 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-2.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-2.2 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-2.2 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-2.2 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-001, "A Guide to Understanding Audit in Trusted Systems," June 1, 1988.

g. Audit Procurement Considerations

The option should exist that either some maximum of security related activities be 
audited or that the System Administrator select events to be audited based on overhead 
considerations.

An audit control switch available to the System Administrator can allow selection of 
audit levels, but never to allow less than some required minimum as determined by the 
DAA.

A requirement exists that authorized personnel shall be able to read all events recorded 
on the audit trail. A selection option is required that may either be a preselection or a 
post selection-option. The preselection option limits the audit data recorded. The post 
selection option reduces the data analyzed from that recorded.

Switches and options must not violate the requirements and intent of the TCSEC.

The audit information should be sufficient to reconstruct a complete sequence of 
security related events. Audit analysis tools can greatly enhance the efficiency of the 
audit control function for the System Administrator. (See NCSC-TG-001 for further 
discussion.)

The capability should be provided to prevent System Administrator and Security Officer 
functions from turning off auditing or modifying those results.

Only the System Administrator or Security Officer should be able to select what is to be 
audited from other events.

(B3 - A1) The requirement to "monitor the occurrence or accumulation of security 
auditable events that may indicate an imminent violation of security policy" is subject to 
interpretation. It is the topic of an entire subfield of security known as 

intrusion detection. The DAA must determine what is reasonable in the context of the 
particular application.

(B3 - A1) "If the occurrence or accumulation of these security relevant events continues, 
the system shall take the least disruptive action to terminate the event." The approach 
taken is very application peculiar and the DAA must further specify the action to be 
taken.

C.3.15	SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.3.1.1.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.3.1.1.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.3.1.1.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.3.1.1.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.3.1.1.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

For many of the system architecture requirements, demonstrating that a requirement is 
satisfied by all of the constituent DOCPs is sufficient to demonstrate that it is satisfied for 
the composite system. The requirements for the "TCB [to] maintain a domain for its 
execution" and for the TCB to "maintain process isolation through the provision of 
distinct address spaces" could be satisfied by the composite DOCP TCBs without each 
constituent DOCP TCB meeting the requirement.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.3.1.1 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.3.1.1 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.3.1.1 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.1.1 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.1.1 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.1 and IR-5 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-3.1.1 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-3.1.1 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-3.1.1 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.1.1 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.1.1 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. System Architecture Procurement Considerations

"Domain" as used in the TCSEC refers to the set of objects a subject has the ability to 
access. It is, for example, the protection environment in which a process is executing. 
Domain is sometimes also called "context'' or "address space.''

Protection granularity can be an issue. Finer granularity (e.g., a few bytes) is ideal for 
providing precise control (down to the byte or word level), but requires a significant 
amount of computer overhead to maintain. The trade-off usually made is to have coarser 
granularity (e.g., 1024 byte blocks) to reduce hardware complexity and retain acceptable 
performance. (See Volume 1, Chapter 3 of this Guideline Series.)

An important consideration is sensitivity label mapping to protection domain 
mechanisms. Hardware features (usually called "keys") allow the TCB to associate 
specific hardware "registers" with the main memory areas (domains) they are 
protecting. There should be sufficient types and numbers of "registers" to ensure the 
number of sensitivity labels for information in the system can be adequately mapped. 
Common ways to achieve these capabilities are through "Descriptor Based Registers," 
"Bounds Registers," and "Virtual Memory Mapping Registers," although other 
approaches may also be used.

Asynchronous events are not predictable (e.g., arrival of a message, the printer running 
out of paper, or communications link errors). Asynchronous event mechanisms are 
hardware features that handle the unpredictable, usually by "interrupting" the 
processor. Once interrupted, the processor then deals with the event. Interpretation of 
DoD 5200.28-STD will probably require hardware features that will cause the processor 
to recognize and respond to specific asynchronous events, such as "security policy 
violations" (in DoD 5200.28-STD phrasing, violations of the Simple Security Property or 
Star Property). Unless hardware features support these properties, software must 
interpret the results of every operation, causing a severe performance penalty. The 
penalty may come into conflict with mission performance requirements.

C.3.16	SYSTEM INTEGRITY SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.3.1.2.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.3.1.2.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.3.1.2.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.3.1.2.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.3.1.2.)

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.3.1.2 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.3.1.2 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.3.1.2 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.1.2 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.1.2 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.1 and IR-2.3.1.2 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-3.1.2 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-3.1.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-3.1.2 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.1.2 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.1.2 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. System Integrity Procurement Considerations

System integrity requirements must be satisfied in the operational system, not just 
demonstrated as part of test. The DAA shall establish the frequency with which system 
integrity validation must be accomplished and it should be incorporated into procedural 
security.

C.3.17	COVERT CHANNEL SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(For B2 through A1) Wherever possible, covert channels identified by the covert channel 
analysis with bandwidths that exceed a rate of one bit in ten seconds, shall be eliminated 
or the TCB shall provide the capability to audit their use.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.3.1.3 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.1.3 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.1.3 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.1 and IR-2.3.1.3 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-3.1.3 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.1.3 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.1.3 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

For Class B2, TCSEC Section 3.2.3.1.3.

For Class B3, TCSEC Section 3.3.3.1.3.

For Class A1, TCSEC Section 4.1.3.1.3.

TCSEC Section 8.0, A Guideline on Covert Channels.

g. Covert Channel Considerations

The TCSEC only requires the analysis of covert channels, trade-offs involved in 
restricting the channels, and identification of the auditable events that may be used in 
the exploitation of known channels. Here it requires that some action be taken for 
correcting them. The procurement initiator should clearly specify in the RFP what will 
be expected of a contractor. Proposal evaluation should further determine what is 
intended by the bidder. This issue must be clearly understood by the Government and 
the bidder and documented in the specification before an award is made.

Covert Channel auditing and control mechanisms can vary widely from one system to 
another. In general, the ability to meet both performance and security requirements 
increases as the security protection mechanisms become more flexible.

C.3.18	TRUSTED FACILITY MANAGEMENT SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the specification portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.3.1.4.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.3.1.4.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.3.1.4.)

b.   DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

The ability to run a trusted system facility properly applies to the combination of DOCP 
TCBs. This requirement can be met across several DOCPs and be shown to apply to all of 
the composing DOCPs provided the individual DOCPs meet the requirement and the 
interactions between the DOCPs at the facility management level are clear.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.3.1.4 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.1.4 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.1.4 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.1 and IR-2.3.1.4 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-3.1.4 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.1.4 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.1.4 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-015, "A Guide to Understanding Trusted Facility Management," October 18, 
1989.

g. Trusted Facility Management Considerations

The TCSEC addresses System Administrator functions and operator functions and 
specifically identifies the ADP (Automated Data Processing) System Administrator. The 
roles and individuals must be specifically identified for this particular application and 
the RFP should show the mapping of particular roles and those called out in the TCSEC. 
For example, if the Security Officer and the ADP System Administrator are one and the 
same, it should be stated or only one name should be used consistently throughout the 
RFP. If there is more than one operator role, this should be identified.

The acquisition authority must carefully consider the division of functions between the 
operator and the System Administrator because the cost of changing them is often high.

C.3.19	TRUSTED RECOVERY SPECIFICATIONS

a. Text of the Specification

(For B3 through A1) Based on the recommendations of a trusted recovery analysis, 
mechanisms shall be provided to assure that, along with procedures, after a computer 
system failure or other discontinuity, recovery without a protection compromise is 
obtained.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

Interface policy shall accommodate and satisfy the required intercommunications 
between DOCPs to effect global recovery.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

In the case of "an ADP system failure or other discontinuity," each DOCP in a B3 or 
above system needs to be able to recover "without a protection compromise." Further, 
the recovery actions of distinct DOCPs needs to be coordinated and combined so that the 
resulting system is not only recovered as far as each DOCP TCB is concerned, but is also 
recovered as a system.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.1.5 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.1.5 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.1 and IR-2.3.1.5 applies

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.1.5 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.1.5 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

For Class B3, TCSEC Section 3.3.3.1.5.

For Class A1, TCSEC Section 4.1.3.1.5.

NCSC-TG-022, "A Guide to Understanding Trusted Recovery in Trusted Systems," 
December 30, 1991.

g. Trusted Recovery Considerations

Satisfactory recovery can have significantly different meaning to different applications 
because of differences in the time criticality of operational results. The procurement 
initiator must be certain that the true operational requirements for this particular 
application are reflected in the RFP.

Note that satisfaction of this requirement does not guarantee data recovery. It keeps the 
system from blindly compromising data and allows the System Administrator to reach a 
known good point in the process where other mission mechanisms (e.g., backup) can 
safely proceed. Trusted recovery does not obviate the need for responsible backup 
procedures and practices.



























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

C.4	STATEMENTS OF WORK

Detailed Statements of Work can be found in this section. The glossary and acronyms 
referenced in Section J and attached to this RFP are considered to be part of this 
Statement of Work.

For each task, the requirements of the Statement of Work (SOW) describe the work the 
Contractor is expected to do. The specification of the deliverable is accomplished within 
a Contract Data Requirements List (CDRL) and its associated Data Item Description 
(DID). Here we have provided sample CDRL numbers to correspond with Section F.

(The appropriate information and considerations for determining Statements of Work 
for the RFP is done just the same as was done in the Specification guided by the decision 
for single policy SOWs using TCSEC, single policy SOWS using the TCSEC along with 
the TNI interpretation, multipolicy SOWS using the TDI and finally multipolicy SOWs 
with DOCPs.)

C.4.1	COVERT CHANNEL ANALYSIS STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.3.1.3.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.3.1.3.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.3.1.3.)

(For B2 through A1)

The Contractor shall conduct an analysis of all auditable events that may occur in the 
exploitation of the identified covert channels.

The Contractor shall conduct an analysis of identified covert channels and bandwidths 
that are non detectable by the auditing mechanisms. The contractor shall determine the 
auditability of channels that have a bandwidth in excess of one bit in ten seconds.

A report of the results of these analyses shall be provided in the form of a Covert 
Channel Analysis Report, written in accordance with CDRL 010.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.3.1.3 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.1.3 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.1.3 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.1 and IR-2.3.1.3 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-3.1.3 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.1.3 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.1.3 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

TCSEC Section 8.0 "A Guideline on Covert Channels."

g. Covert Channel Analysis Considerations

(None)

C.4.2	TRUSTED RECOVERY STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(For B3 through A1)

The Contractor shall conduct an analysis of the computer system design to determine 
procedures and/or mechanisms that need to be activated in case of a system failure or 
other discontinuity.

Where procedures are recommended they should be thoroughly documented in CDRL 
002 Trusted Facility Manual.

Where design is recommended it is delivered in the form of system design in accordance 
with CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 006, Descriptive Top Level 
Specification; CDRL 008, Design Specification; and CDRL 012 Security Test Plan.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

In the case of "an ADP system failure or other discontinuity," each DOCP in a B3 or 
above system needs to be able to recover "without a protection compromise." Further, 
the recovery actions of distinct DOCPs needs to be coordinated and combined so that the 
resulting system is not only recovered as far as each DOCP TCB is concerned, but is also 
recovered as a system.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.1.5 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.1.5 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.1 and IR-2.3.1.5 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.1.5 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.1.5 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

For Class B3, TCSEC Section 3.3.3.1.5.

For Class A1, TCSEC Section 4.1.3.1.5.

NCSC-TG-022, "A Guide to Understanding Trusted Recovery in Trusted Systems," 
December 30, 1991.

TCSEC Section 5.3.3, Assurance Control Objective, p. 63.

g. Trusted Recovery Procurement Considerations

(None)

C.4.3	SECURITY TESTING STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.3.2.1. and TCSEC Section 10.1.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.3.2.1. and TCSEC Section 10.2.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.3.2.1. and TCSEC Section 10.2.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.3.2.1. and TCSEC Section 10.2.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.3.2.1. and TCSEC Section 10.3.)

The contractor shall deliver test results in the form of Test Reports in accordance with 
CDRL 014. A final summary Test Report is called out under Section 4.9 Test 
Documentation Statement of Work.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

Security testing shall include testing against the individual DOCP interface policies and 
requirements.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

This requirement applies as stated in the TCSEC to the entire TCB. If a TCB consists of 
TCB subsets meeting the conditions for evaluation by parts, the satisfaction of the 
requirements by each TCB subset suffices to satisfy the requirement for the entire TCB. 
Otherwise, security testing must include testing of the entire TCB (even if the results of 
testing the individual TCB subsets are available).

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TNI should be considered by the procurement initiator in 
the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.3.2.1 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.3.2.1 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.3.2.1 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.2.1 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.2.1 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.2 and IR-2.3.2.1 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-3.2.1 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-3.2.1 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-3.2.1 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.2.1 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.2.1 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-002, "Trusted Product Evaluations: A Guide for Vendors," June 22, 1990.

NCSC-TG-019, "Trusted Product Evaluation Questionnaire," May 2, 1992.

NCSC-TG-028, "Assessing Controlled Access Protection," May 25, 1992.

g. Security Testing Procurement Considerations

Many of the statements in the security testing requirements are subject to interpretation, 
(e.g., "relatively resistant to penetration," consistency with top level specifications, "no 
more than a few correctable flaws," and "reasonable confidence that few remain"). The 
Procurement Initiator in the RFP must attempt to convey in any manner possible what 
will be expected by the Government, not only in satisfying the security testing 
requirement but in terms of meeting the certification evaluation. Similarly in evaluation 
of the bidder's response to testing requirements of the RFP, the Government must be 
very careful to understand that the contractor understands what is required. As an 
example, there is a great advantage in identifying who will conduct the penetration 
analysis (B2 and above) and how the results of that penetration will be dealt with. A 
clear understanding must exist and be documented before an award is made.

C.4.4	DESIGN SPECIFICATION AND VERIFICATION STATEMENT 
OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.3.2.2.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.3.2.2.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.3.2.2.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.3.2.2.)

(For Class B1)

Documentation developed under CDRL 004, Informal Security Policy Model, and CDRL 
008, Design Specification, shall be maintained as a result of this effort with updates 
delivered according to the CDRL.

Initial delivery of CDRL 004, Informal Security Policy Model, and CDRL 008, Design 
Specification, is addressed in Section 4.10, Design Document Statement of Work. 
Subsequent deliveries shall be delivered under this task.

(For Class B2)

Documentation developed under CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 006, 
Descriptive Top Level Specification; and CDRL 008, Design Specification; shall be 
maintained as a result of this effort with updates delivered according to the CDRL.

Initial delivery of CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 006, Descriptive Top 
Level Specification; and CDRL 008, Design Specification; is addressed in Section 4.10, 
Design Document Statement of Work. Subsequent deliveries shall be delivered under 
this task.

(For Class B3)

Documentation developed under CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 006, 
Descriptive Top Level Specification; and CDRL 008, Design Specification; shall be 
maintained as a result of this effort with updates delivered according to the CDRL.

Documentation resulting from this effort shall be provided in accordance with CDRL 
009 Trusted Computing Base Verification Report.

Initial delivery of CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 006, Descriptive Top 
Level Specification; and CDRL 008, Design Specification; is addressed in Section 4.10, 
Design Document Statement of Work. Subsequent deliveries shall be delivered under 
this task.

(For Class A1)

Documentation developed under CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 006, 
Descriptive Top Level Specification; CDRL 007, Formal Top Level Specification; and 
CDRL 008, Design Specification; shall be maintained as a result of this effort with 
updates delivered according to the CDRL.

Documentation resulting from this effort shall be provided in accordance with CDRL 
009, Trusted Computing Base Verification Report.

Initial delivery of CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 006, Descriptive Top 
Level Specification; CDRL 007, Formal Top Level Specification; and CDRL 008, Design 
Specification; is addressed in Section 4.10, Design Document Statement of Work. 
Subsequent deliveries shall be delivered under this task.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

Design specification and verification requirements apply to interface policy and the 
resultant interface requirements between DOCPs.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

For many of the design specification and verification requirements, demonstrating that a 
requirement is satisfied by all of the constituent DOCPs is sufficient to demonstrate that 
it is satisfied for the composite system. The requirements for a "formal model of the 
security policy supported by the TCB" and that the DTLS at B3 

and the FTLS at A1 "be an accurate description of the TCB interface" applies in a limited 
way to the entire TCB.

After complying security models are provided for the individual DOCPs, a convincing 
argument is required to explain how the set of models represents, abstractly, the policy 
of the entire system.

After complying top-level specifications (DTLS at B3 and FTLS at A1) are provided for 
the individual DOCPs, an explicit and convincing description how the set of top-level 
specifications describe the TCB interface with respect to exceptions, errors and effects 
must also be provided.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.3.2.2 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.3.2.2 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.2.2 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.2.2 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.2 and IR-2.3.2.2 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-3.2.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-3.2.2 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.2.2 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.2.2 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-014, "Guidelines for Formal Verification Systems," April 1, 1989.

g. Design Specification and Verification Considerations

If there is a multifaceted policy (e.g., both mandatory access control and discretionary 
access control policies), then all facets must be represented in the Top Level Specification 
and Security Model.

(B2 - A1) To broaden the audience, there is often an advantage to requiring an informal 
policy model as well as a formal one.

C.4.5	CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.3.2.3.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.3.2.3.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.3.2.3.)

(B2 through A1) Prepare and deliver TCB Configuration Management Plan in 
accordance with CDRL 011. One section of this document is originated under C.4.6.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.3.2.3 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.3.2.3 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.2.3 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.2 and IR-2.3.2.3 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-3.2.3 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-3.2.3 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.2.3 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-006,   "A Guide to Understanding Configuration Management in Trusted 
Systems," March 28, 1988.

g. Configuration Management Considerations

Master copies should be protected at the level of the operational data for which it will be 
used.

(B2 - A1) The maintenance of a consistent mapping between code and documentation 
may require further definition (e. g., including the response time for bringing 
documentation up to date with changes and the exact amount of effort to go into this 
requirement).

C.4.6	TRUSTED DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.3.2.4.)

These procedures shall be delivered as a Section on Trusted Distribution as a part of the 
Trusted Computing Base Configuration Management Plan in accordance with CDRL 
011. The rest of the document is developed under 4.5, Configuration Management 
Statement of Work.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.3.2.4 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.3.2 and IR-2.3.2.4 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-3.2.4 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-008, "A Guide to Understanding Trusted Distribution in Trusted Systems," 
December 15, 1988.

g. Trusted Distribution Procurement Considerations

(None)

C.4.7	SECURITY FEATURES USER'S GUIDE STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.4.1.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.4.1.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.4.1.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.4.1.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.4.1.)

(C2 through A1) The Contractor shall produce and deliver the Security Features User's 
Guide in accordance with CDRL 001.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.4.1 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.4.1 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.4.1 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.4.1 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.4.1 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.4.1 and IR-2.4.1 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-4.1 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-4.1 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-4.1 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-4.1 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-4.1 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-026, "A Guide to Writing the Security Features User's Guide for Trusted 
Systems," September 1991.

g. Security Features User's Guide Considerations

The Contractor should conduct a security engineering analysis to determine user 
functionality related to security. This analysis should also develop the user guidelines 
for consistent and effective use of the protection features of the proposed solution. This 
analysis should address a description of expected system reaction to security-related 
events.

C.4.8	TRUSTED FACILITY MANUAL STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.4.2.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.4.2.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.4.2.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.4.2.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.4.2.)

(C2 through A1) The Contractor shall deliver the Trusted Facility Manual in accordance 
with CDRL 002.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

(None)

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

(None)

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.4.2 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.4.2 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.4.2 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.4.2 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.4.2 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.4.2 and IR-2.4.2 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-4.2 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-4.2 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-4.2 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-4.2 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-4.2 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-027, "Information System Security Officer Guideline," June 1991.

g. Trusted Facility Manual Considerations

The Contractor should conduct an analysis to identify the functions performed by the 
role of the System Administrator. This analysis should identify all non-security 
functions that can be performed in the System Administrator role. The Contractor 
should conduct an analysis to determine, for the operator and System Administrator, the 
specific cautions about functions and privileges that should be controlled while 

running a secure facility and the specific interactions of the protection features. The 
Contractor should also conduct an engineering analysis of the system to identify all 
information and events to be audited, including rationale (i.e., cost, conformance to 
requirements, security, and performance impacts) for the selection of each item. The 
Contractor should also identify the types of events that occur within the system that are 
not audited, along with reasons for not auditing them.

C.4.9	TEST DOCUMENTATION STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.4.3.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.4.3.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.4.3.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.4.3.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.4.3.)

(C2 through A1)

The Contractor shall deliver the Security Test Plan in accordance with CDRL 012.

The Contractor shall deliver the Test Procedure in accordance with CDRL 013.

The Contractor shall deliver the Test Report in accordance with CDRL 014 using as input 
Test Reports generated in 4.3 Security Testing Statement of Work.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

Test Documentation shall include testing of interface requirements.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

Test Documentation shall include testing of global requirements.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.4.3 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.4.3 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.4.3 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.4.3 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.4.3 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.4.3 and IR-2.4.3 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-4.3 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-4.3 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-4.3 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-4.3 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-4.3 applies.)

f. Important References

(None)

g. Security Testing Procurement Considerations

The Contractor should analyze the sensitivity of information processed on the delivered 
system, the desired mode of operation, and the Designated Approving Authority's 
(DAA's) certification requirements to assist in developing the test approach.

If an entity other than a contractor is to do the Security Testing, and Test Report, this 
should be clarified in the Statement of Work. The Test Plan (which is a management tool 
detailing who does what and when) and Test Procedures (which is a step-by-step testing 
script) should be prepared by the Contractor to ensure that specific knowledge of the 
TCB implementation can be included in their development. The Test Plan and Test 
Procedure may later be augmented or modified by the entity doing the testing under 
separate contract or agreement.

For B2 and above, penetration testing must consider the specific operational 
environment and threat model of this particular application.

C.4.10	DESIGN DOCUMENTATION STATEMENT OF WORK

a. Text of the Statement of Work

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable, the corresponding section of the TCSEC 
should be repeated in the statement of work portion of the RFP verbatim:

For Class C2, repeat TCSEC Section 2.2.4.4.

For Class B1, repeat TCSEC Section 3.1.4.4.

For Class B2, repeat TCSEC Section 3.2.4.4.

For Class B3, repeat TCSEC Section 3.3.4.4.

For Class A1, repeat TCSEC Section 4.1.4.4.)

(For Class C2)

Documentation resulting from this effort shall be provided in accordance with CDRL 
003, Philosophy of Protection Report, and CDRL 008, Design Specification.

(For Class B1)

Documentation resulting from this effort shall be provided in accordance with CDRL 
003, Philosophy of Protection Report; CDRL 004, Informal Security Policy Model; and 
CDRL 008, Design Specification.

Initial delivery of CDRL 004 and CDRL 008 is addressed under this task. Subsequent 
deliveries shall be delivered under Section 4.4, Design Specification and Verification 
Statement of Work.

Initial delivery of CDRL 008 is addressed under this task. Subsequent deliveries shall be 
delivered under Section 4.4, Design Specification and Verification Statement of Work.

(For Class B2)

Documentation resulting from this effort shall be provided in accordance with CDRL 
003, Philosophy of Protection Report; CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 
006, Descriptive Top Level Specification; and CDRL 008, Design Specification.

Initial delivery of CDRL 005, CDRL 006, and CDRL 008 is addressed under this task. 
Subsequent deliveries shall be delivered under Section 4.4, Design Specification and 
Verification Statement of Work.

(For Class B3)

Documentation resulting from this effort shall be provided in accordance with CDRL 
003, Philosophy of Protection Report; CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 
006 Descriptive Top Level Specification; and CDRL 008, Design Specification.

Initial delivery of CDRL 005, CDRL 006, and CDRL 008 is addressed under this task. 
Subsequent deliveries shall be delivered under Section 4.4, Design Specification and 
Verification Statement of Work.

(For Class A1)

Documentation resulting from this effort shall be provided in accordance with CDRL 
003, Philosophy of Protection Report; CDRL 005, Formal Security Policy Model; CDRL 
006, Descriptive Top Level Specification; CDRL 007, Formal Top Level Specification; and 
CDRL 008, Design Specification.

Initial delivery of CDRL 005, CDRL 006, CDRL 007, and CDRL 008 is addressed under 
this task. Subsequent deliveries shall be delivered under Section 4.4, Design 
Specification and Verification Statement of Work.

b. DOCP Interface Policy Interpretation

Design Documentation shall include design resulting from interface requirements.

c. DOCP Global Policy Interpretation

Design Documentation shall include design resulting from global requirements.

d. Trusted Network Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TNI is selected, the 
corresponding section of the TCSEC should be considered by the procurement initiator 
in the specification portion of the RFP:

For Class C2, TNI Section 2.2.4.4 applies.

For Class B1, TNI Section 3.1.4.4 applies.

For Class B2, TNI Section 3.2.4.4 applies.

For Class B3, TNI Section 3.3.4.4 applies.

For Class A1, TNI Section 4.1.4.4 applies.)

e. Trusted Database Management Interpretation

(Where the given Division/Class is applicable and the TDI is selected, the corresponding 
section of the TDI should be considered by the procurement initiator:

For all classes, TDI Sections TC-5.2.4.4 and IR-2.4.4 applies.

For Class C2, TDI Appendix A Section C2-4.4 applies.

For Class B1, TDI Appendix A Section B1-4.4 applies.

For Class B2, TDI Appendix A Section B2-4.4 applies.

For Class B3, TDI Appendix A Section B3-4.4 applies.

For Class A1, TDI Appendix A Section A1-4.4 applies.)

f. Important References

(Note: References are for information only and, unless specified elsewhere, are not to be 
taken as requirements.)

NCSC-TG-007, "A Guide to Understanding Design Documentation in Trusted Systems," 
October 2, 1988.

g. Design Documentation Procurement Considerations

The Contractor should conduct an analysis of the sensitivity of information to be 
processed on the delivered system, the desired mode of operation, and the Designated 
Approving Authority's (DAA's) certification requirements to determine a philosophy of 
protection for the system. This should also analyze how that philosophy of protection is 
translated into the specific system TCB.

The Contractor should analyze the TCB enforcement of the security policy specified in 
the philosophy of protection document.



























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RFP SECTION F - DELIVERIES AND PERFORMANCE

Text of Section F

(A1) Procedures generated under Trusted Distribution Statement of Work shall be 
followed for TCB software, firmware and hardware as well as updates. (See Section 
C.4.6, "Trusted Distribution Statement of Work.")

Data Deliverables: The following data deliverables in the form of Contract Data 
Requirements Lists are found referenced in Section J of this RFP and contained in 
Attachment A. (For multipolicy systems, these documents are called for more than once, 
e.g., once for every DOCP. The CDRL can call for a separate document for each 
requirement, but more often it makes sense to have a single document with a single 
general system section to address otherwise repetitive system factors, a section for each 
DOCP or TCB subset to deal with uniqueness, and finally a section associated with each 
division/class contained in the system.)

CLASS 
RANGE

CDRL*

DOCUMENT

SOWs

C2-A1

CDRL 001

Security Feature User's Guide

DI-MCCR-81349

C.4.7

C2-A1

CDRL 002

Trusted Facility Manual

DI-TMSS-81352

C.4.2, C.4.8

C2-A1

CDRL 003

Philosophy of Protection

DI-MISC-81348

C.4.10

B1

CDRL 004

Informal Security Policy Model

DI-MISC-81341

C.4.4, C.4.10

B2-A1

CDRL 005

Formal Security Policy Model

DI-MISC-81346

C.4.2, C.4.4, C.4.10

B2-A1

CDRL 006

Descriptive Top Level Specification

DI-MISC-81342

C.4.2, C.4.4, C.4.10

A1

CDRL 007

Formal Top Level Specification

DI-MISC-81347

C.4.4, C.4.10

C2-A1

CDRL 008

Design Specification

DI-MCCR-81344

C.4.2, C.4.4, C.4.10

B3-A1

CDRL 009

Trusted Computing Base Verification Report

DI-MISC-81350

C.4.4

B2-A1

CDRL 010

Covert Channel Analysis Report

DI-MISC-81345

C.4.1

B2-A1

CDRL 011

Trusted Computing Base Configuration 
Management Plan

DI-CMAN-81343

C.4.5, C.4.6

C2-A1

CDRL 012

Security Test Plan

DI-NDTI-81351

C.4.2, C.4.9

C2-A1

CDRL 013

Test Procedure

DI-NDTI-80603

C.4.9

C2-A1

CDRL 014

Test/Inspection Reports

DI-NDTI-80809A

C.4.3, C.4.9

Table F-1 Data Deliverables   (*) See note at top of next page.



* These are sample CDRL's used to facilitate the presentations of this guideline. 
Procurement initiators will have their own CDRL's, and will therefore need to cross-
reference the cited SOW paragraph numbers listed above and insert their own CDRL 
numbers in those paragraphs.

Important References

NCSC-TG-006, "A Guide to Understanding Configuration Management in Trusted 
Systems," March 28, 1988.

NCSC-TG-008, "A Guide to Understanding Trusted Distribution in Trusted Systems," 
December 15, 1988.

Section F Procurement Considerations

Deliveries:

The referenced document, NCSC-TG-008, discusses protective packaging, couriers, 
registered mail, message authentication codes, encryption, and site validation.

Performance:

Application specific performance requirements must be developed by the procurement 
initiator and placed in Section F of the RFP as requirements. The following is a sample 
list of such requirements that need to be quantified for the application:



·	Performance requirements must be satisfied under both typical and peak conditions.

·	Performance requirements should be such that both mission and audit requirements can 
be met without performance conflict.

·	The bidder shall identify the time to initialize, recover, and shutdown the system in a se-
cure state, consistent with RFP requirements.

The bidder shall identify the maximum, minimum and average time to perform 
reference verification once a subject request has been made, consistent with RFP 
requirements.



·	The bidder shall identify the maximum, minimum, and average time to create an audit 
record associated with an auditable event.

·	The bidder shall identify the amount of time required of a user for security during a best 
case, typical case, and worst case user session, consistent with RFP requirements.

·	The bidder shall identify the maximum, average, and minimum amount of time required 
to seek out a specific audit record, the audit records associated with a single subject 
over a day, and the audit records associated with a single object over the day, consistent 
with RFP requirements.

·	The bidder shall identify the maximum, average, and minimum percentage overhead due 
to security in the intended operational environment over the course of a day, consistent 
with RFP requirements.

























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RFP SECTION J - LIST OF DOCUMENTS, EXHIBITS AND OTHER AT-
TACHMENTS

Text of Section J



The following is a listing of all attachments to the contract:

	ATTACHMENT NO.			TITLE

	A 			CONTRACT DATA REQUIREMENTS LIST

	B 			GLOSSARY

	C 			ACRONYMS

	D 			REFERENCES

Important References

(None)

Section J Procurement Considerations

RFP Sections A through K, when combined with the attachments referenced above, 
constitute the contract. Sections L (discussed next) and M (discussed in Volume 4 of this 
guideline series) serve only to support the RFP and are discarded once the contract has 
been awarded.





















THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RFP SECTION L - INSTRUCTIONS, CONDITIONS, AND NOTICES TO 
OFFERORS

Text of Section L

(These statements shall be included under GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE 
PREPARATION OF PROPOSALS - SPECIFIC INSTRUCTIONS. In multipolicy 
proposal, theoretically there could be a proposal for each unique DOCP or TCB subset. 
However, from a practical viewpoint, and to withstand the redundancy, it is best to have 
a general presentation of the requirements, dealing with exceptions as appropriate, 
whether because of Division/Class or some other reason.)

Offerors shall identify in the technical proposal the commercially available products 
proposed to meet the acquisition's operational and security requirements and/or 
reasons that none were chosen as part of the offeror's solution. Responses must be 
supported by appropriate published technical specifications and technical documents.

Offerors shall identify tests, analyses, and documents previously produced for the 
development and evaluation of any proposed EPL product to be used in satisfying the 
requirements of this contract. Offerors shall also provide reasons why such information 
is not available or is not being proposed as part of the solution, if this is the case.

TECHNICAL

·	The bidder shall precisely identify all security related hardware, firmware, and software.

·	The bidder shall present a description of the philosophy of protection and an explanation 
of how this philosophy will be translated into the TCB.

·	If the TCB is composed of distinct modules, the interfaces between these modules shall 
be described by the bidder.

·	The bidder shall provide procedures for examining and maintaining audit files.

·	The bidder shall describe the test plan.

·	The bidder shall describe the approach to configuration management.

·	The bidder shall describe trusted initialization and shutdown.

·	The bidder shall describe the process of creating, maintaining, and protecting from modi-
fication, or unauthorized access or destruction, an audit trail of accesses, and objects the 
TCB protects.

·	(B1-A1) The bidder shall describe the operator and system administrator functions relat-
ed to security, to include changing the security characteristics of a user.

·	(B1-A1) The bidder shall state a security model either informally or formally and pro-
vide an explanation to show that it is sufficient to enforce the security policy.

·	(B1-A1) The bidder shall identify specific TCB protection mechanisms with an explana-
tion given to show that they satisfy the model.

·	(B2-A1) The bidder shall describe the approach to covert channel analysis.

·	(B2-A1) The bidder shall provide a descriptive top level specification. 

·	(A1) A formal top level specification shall be provided. 

·	(B3-A1) The bidder shall define system recovery procedures or mechanisms with an ex-
planation as to how the system will recover without a protection compromise.

·	(B3-A1) The bidder shall identify the functions performed by the System Administrator.

·	(A1) The bidder shall describe techniques to show that the Formal Top Level Specifica-
tion (FTLS) is consistent with the model.

·	The bidder shall show an understanding of the mission requirements and reflect the secu-
rity relevant aspects in the proposed solution.

·	The bidder shall show an understanding of the environment of the system as stated in 
the RFP and the system proposed shall address and meet all of the environmental re-
quirements.



MANAGEMENT 

·	Secure systems developed, tested, and placed into operational usage have notoriously 
high cost risk, schedule risk, and technical risk because of the ease in misunderstanding 
the full implications of the Government requirements as contained in the TCSEC. The 
bidder shall provide, not only anticipated program plan items, but also where deviations 
could occur, the worst those deviations could become, and the approach to be taken to 
recover from such anomalies. 

·	The bidder shall summarize security experience applicable to this project, major success-
es, problems and their solutions, and explain how such experience will be brought to 
bear.

·	The bidder shall explain the relationship between the senior security specialist and the 
Program Manager and how it will be assured that technical issues will be resolved to re-
duce security risk and cost to the Government.

·	The bidder shall identify key individuals on this project; summarize their applicable edu-
cation, training, and work experience; specifically state their experience with trusted sys-
tem design, development, and test including Division/Class and whether NSA evaluation 
or certification evaluation were successfully achieved.

·	The bidder shall identify who specifically is responsible for any security modeling, secu-
rity testing, configuration management, TCB design, and TCB build, as applicable.

·	The bidder shall show how the security organization operates as a cohesive entity within 
the overall project organization so that security receives the appropriate attention and 
continuity through development phases, as applicable.

·	The bidder shall show how the management plan is organized such that time and effort 
is not wasted on problems that can arise in design and development of a trusted system.

·	The bidder shall show how potential problems are identified early and how they are 
treated at a high level with the appropriate level of expertise before they result in a high 
cost or increased risk situation.

·	The bidder shall show specific personnel continuity during the critical stages of design, 
development, test, certification and accreditation, as applicable.

·	The bidder shall identify who will be the primary interface during certification.

·	The schedule shall be easily and precisely associated with the work plan with the deliv-
erables identified in the management proposal and in the technical proposal.

·	Items that are schedule critical to the project and items where there is high schedule risk 
shall be delineated to the appropriate detail level on the schedule.

·	The bidder shall identify from his/her experience where the areas of greatest schedule 
risk exist in his/her proposed approach to satisfy the requirements of the RFP for this se-
cure system.

·	For the areas of high schedule risk, the bidder shall show how he/she intends to identify 
the situation of a schedule slippage and then what will be done to minimize the impact 
of the deviation.



COST

·	Commercial off-the-shelf items shall be broken down to the degree that they will be de-
scribed on the purchase order. Other uniquely identified deliverables (e.g., manuals, com-
puter programs, services) shall be identifiable to level-of-effort, schedule, and overall 
cost.

·	Costs of all items associated in any way with security and the acquisition/development 
of the secure system shall be identifiable in the cost breakdown.

·	The bidder shall identify from his/her experience where the areas of greatest cost risk ex-
ist in his/her proposed approach to satisfy the requirements of the RFP for this secure 
system.

·	For the areas of high cost risk, the bidder shall show how he/she intends to identify the 
situation of a cost overrun and then what will be done to minimize the impact of the de-
viation.



GENERAL

·	A single work breakdown structure shall be used in all three proposals, allowing a pre-
cise cross referencing between cost, effort, schedule, individuals, and elements of the 
technical work plan.

·	Trade-offs may be purely technical or they may be decided because of cost, schedule or 
risk issues. The bidder shall identify significant trade-offs along with the results and ra-
tionale for the decision.

·	The bidder shall identify what significant trade-offs are yet to be made along with the 
factors involved in the decision.



Important References

(None)



Section L Procurement Considerations

In procuring EPL products, a goal is to use as much of the existing documentation and 
certification evidence as possible in satisfaction of the requirements of the contract. 
Usually this data does not belong to the Government. Thus bidders are encouraged to 
seek out and attempt to buy or otherwise obtain existing documentation from the 
developing vendor in an attempt to reduce the cost and risk of the bid and ensuing 
contract. This approach can also provide a significant competitive advantage for EPL 
solutions.

RFP ATTACHMENT A - CONTRACT DATA REQUIREMENTS LIST 
(CDRL) FORM DD1423



Contract Data Requirements List Discussion

CDRL's will be provided for the following documents as part of Volume 3 of this 
guideline series. The CDRL's should be attached to this section and adapted to the 
procurement. For each document and for each Division/Class there will also be a DID 
Number and DID source reference.



·	Security Feature User's Guide

·	Trusted Facility Manual

·	Philosophy of Protection Report

·	Informal Security Policy Model

·	Formal Security Policy Model

·	Descriptive Top Level Specification

·	Formal Top Level Specification

·	Design Specification

·	Trusted Computing Base Verification Report

·	Covert Channel Analysis Report

·	TCB Configuration Management Plan

·	Security Test Plan

·	Test Procedure

·	Test Reports





















THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RFP ATTACHMENT B - GLOSSARY

Text of the Glossary

(The Glossary Section of the TCSEC should be repeated here verbatim.)

The ADP (automated data processing) system definition used in the TCSEC should be 
treated as synonymous with AIS.



Important References

NCSC-TG-004, Glossary of Computer Security Terms, October 21,1988.



Glossary Procurement Considerations

Any conflicts between security terms and system terms must be found and resolved. 
Precise accuracy of interpretation requirements in the Specifications and Statements of 
Work depends greatly on these definitions. Changes must not be made that might 
invalidate the Security Specifications and Statements of Work.

























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RFP ATTACHMENT C - ACRONYMS

ADP		 Automated Data Processing

AIS		 Automated Information System

CDRL		 Contract Data Requirements List

COTS		 Commercial-Off-The-Shelf

DAA		 Designated Approving Authority

DAC		 Discretionary Access Control

DID		 Data Item Description

DOCP		 Domain of Constant Policy

DoD		 Department of Defense

DTLS		 Descriptive Top-Level Specification

ECP		 Engineering Change Proposal

EPL		 Evaluated Products List

FTLS		 Formal Top-Level Specification

NCSC		 National Computer Security Center

NIST		 National Institute of Standards and Technology

NSA		 National Security Agency

RFP		 Request for Proposal

SOW		 Statement of Work

TCB		 Trusted Computing Base

TCSEC		 Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria























THIS PAGE INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RFP ATTACHMENT D - REFERENCES

Text of the References

[1]	DoD 5200.1-R, Information Security Program Regulation, August 1982, June 1986, 
change June 27, 1988.

[2]	DoD 5200.2-R, DoD Personnel Security Program, January 1987.

[3]	DoD Directive 5200.28, Security Requirements for Automated Information Systems 
(AISs), March 21, 1988.

[4]	DoD 5200.28-M, (Draft) "Automated Information System Security Manual," April 29, 
1991.

[5]	DoD 5200.28-STD, DoD Trusted System Evaluation Criteria, December 26, 1985.

[6]	CSC-STD-002-85, Department of Defense (DoD) Password Management Guideline, 
April 12, 1985.

[7]	Johnson, H.L., "Use of the Trusted computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) for 
Complex, Evolving, Multipolicy Systems," A technical report written for the NSA, Feb-
ruary 1, 1993.

[8]	NCSC-TG-001, A Guide to Understanding Audit in Trusted Systems, June 1, 1988.

[9]	NCSC-TG-002, Version 2, Trusted Product Evaluation, A Guide for Vendors, April 29, 
1990.

[10]	NCSC-TG-003, A Guide to Understanding Discretionary Access Control (DAC) in 
Trusted Systems, September 30, 1987.

[11]	NCSC-TG-004, Glossary of Computer Security Terms, October 21,1988.

[12]	NCSC-TG-005, Trusted Network Interpretation, July 31, 1987.

[13]	NCSC-TG-006, A Guide to Understanding Configuration Management in Trusted Sys-
tems, March 28, 1988.

[14]	NCSC-TG-007, A Guide to Understanding Design Documentation in Trusted Systems, 
October 2, 1988.

[15]	(A1 Only) NCSC-TG-008, A Guide to Understanding Trusted Distribution in Trusted 
Systems, December 15, 1988.

[16]	NCSC-TG-010, Version 1, A Guide to Understanding Security Modeling in Trusted Sys-
tems, October, 1992.

[17]	(A1 Only) NCSC-TG-014, Guidelines for Formal Verification Systems, April 1, 1989.

[18]	NCSC-TG-015, A Guide to Understanding Trusted Facility Management, October 18, 
1989.

[19]	NCSC-TG-016, Version 1, Guidelines for Writing Trusted Facility Manuals, October, 
1992.

[20]	NCSC-TG-017, A Guide to Understanding Identification and Authentication in Trusted 
Systems, September 1, 1991.

[21]	NCSC-TG-018, A Guide to Understanding Object Reuse in Trusted Systems, July, 1992.

[22]	NCSC-TG-019, Trusted Product Evaluation Questionnaire, October 16, 1989.

[23]	NCSC-TG-021, Trusted Database Management System Interpretation of the TCSEC, 
April, 1991.

[24]	NCSC-TG-022, A Guide to Understanding Trusted Recovery in Trusted Systems, De-
cember 30, 1991.

[25]	NCSC-TG-024, Version 1, Volume 4/4, (Draft) "A Guide to Procurement of Trusted 
Systems: How to Evaluate a Bidder's Proposal Document-An Aid to Procurement Initi-
ators and Contractors."

[26]	NCSC-TG-025, A Guide to Understanding Data Remanence in Automated Information 
Systems, September 1991.

[27]	NCSC-TG-026, A Guide to Writing the Security Features User's Guide for Trusted Sys-
tems, September 1991.

[28]	NCSC-TG-027, Information System Security Officer Guideline, June 1991.

[29]	NCSC-TG-028, Assessing Controlled Access Protection, May 25, 1992.

[30]	NCSC-TG-030, A Guide to Understanding Covert Channel Analysis of Trusted Sys-
tems, November 1993.

A single complimentary copy of NSA guidelines (CSC-STD- and NCSC-TG-) may be 
obtained from Department of Defense, INFOSEC Awareness Operations Center, Fort 
George G. Meade, MD 20755-6000. By phone, call (410) 766-8729.

DoD documents and more than single copies of NSA guidelines may be obtained from 
the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 
20402. Mastercard or VISA may be used. By phone, call (202) 783-3238.

Important References

None

References Procurement Considerations

DoD and NSA continue to publish guides and other supportive documents. The initiator 
should continue to check the document list to ensure a complete set of references are 
being supplied and the most up to date versions are being referenced.

(This is the end of the standard RFP. The following Appendix pertains only to this 
Volume 2 Strawman Guideline.)

APPENDIX A BIBLIOGRAPHY

This is the bibliography for this guideline and is not intended to be part of the 
standard RFP provided in previous sections. 

[1]	AFSSM 5031, Complex System Guide, Air Force Special Security Instruction, Air Force 
Cryptologic Support Center, Air Force Intelligence Command, 1991.

[2]	A Guide to Standard Solicitation Documents for Federal Information Processing Re-
sources, General Services Administration, June 30, 1991.

[3]	"Competition in Contracting Act of 1984" (CICA).

[4]	CSC-STD-002-85, Department of Defense (DoD) Password Management Guideline, 
April 12, 1985.

[5]	CSC-STD-003-85, Computer Security Requirements-Guidance for Applying the Depart-
ment of Defense (DoD) Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) to Spe-
cific Environments, June 25, 1985 (Updated as enclosure 4 of DoD Directive 5200.28).

[6]	CSC-STD-004-85, Technical Rationale Behind CSC-STD-003-85: Computer Security Re-
quirements-Guidance for Applying the Department of Defense (DoD) Trusted Comput-
er System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) to Specific Environments, June 25, 1985.

[7]	DoD Instruction 5000.2, Defense Acquisition Management Policy, February 23, 1991.

[8]	DoD 5000.2-M, Defense Acquisition Management Documentation and Reports, Febru-
ary, 1991.

[9]	DoD 5010.12-L, Acquisition Management Systems and Data Requirements Control List, 
October 1, 1990.

[10]	DoD 5200.1-R, Information Security Program Regulation, June 1986, Change June 27, 
1988.

[11]	DoD 5200.2-R, DoD Personnel Security Program, January 1987.

[12]	DoD Directive 5200.28, Security Requirements for Automated Information Systems 
(AISs), March 21, 1988.

[13]	DoD 5200.28-M, (Draft) "Automated Information System Security Manual," April 29, 
1991.

[14]	DoD 5200.28-STD, DoD Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria, December 26, 
1985.

[15]	DoD Directive 5215.1, Computer Security Evaluation Center, October 25, 1982.

[16]	DoD Directive 5220.22, Industrial Security Program, December 8, 1980.

[17]	DoD 5220.22-M, Industrial Security Manual for Safeguarding Classified Information, 
January 1991.

[18]	DoD 5220.22-R, Industrial Security Regulation, December, 1985.

[19]	Executive Order 12356, "National Security Information," April 6, 1982.

[20]	"Federal Acquisition Regulation" (FAR) Title 48, 1990 edition issued by General Servic-
es Administration, DoD, and National Institute of Standards and Technology (these orga-
nizations also issue the "DoD FAR Supplement").

[21]	Federal Information Resources Management Regulation (FIRMR), General Services Ad-
ministration (41 CFR Ch 201).

[22]	FIPS PUB 31, Guidelines for ADP Physical Security and Risk Management, U.S.Depart-
ment of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, June 1974.

[23]	FIPS PUB 39, Glossary for Computer System Security, U.S. Department of Commerce, 
National Bureau of Standards, February 15, 1976.

[24]	FIPS PUB 41, Computer Security Guidelines for Implementing the Privacy Act of 1974, 
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards.

[25]	FIPS PUB 48, Guidelines on Evaluation of Techniques for Automated Personal Identifi-
cation, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, April 1, 1977.

[26]	FIPS PUB 65, Guideline for Automatic Data Processing Risk Analysis, U.S. Department 
of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, August 1, 1979.

[27]	FIPS PUB 73, Guidelines for Security of Computer Applications, U.S. Department of 
Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, June 30, 1980.

[28]	FIPS PUB 83, Guideline for User Authentication Techniques for Computer Network Ac-
cess, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards.

[29]	FIPS PUB 102, Guidelines for Computer Security Certification and Accreditation, U.S. 
Department of Commerce, National Bureau of Standards, Sept., 27, 1983.

[30]	FIPS PUB 112, Password Usage Standard, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Bu-
reau of Standards, May 30, 1985.

[31]	Gasser, M., Building a Secure Computer System, Van Nostrand Reinhold, NY, 1988.

[32]	Information Systems Security Products and Services Catalogue, National Security Agen-
cy, (Published Quarterly).

[33]	Johnson, H.L., An Approach to Security Test, AFCEA 4th Annual Symposium on C3I 
Technology, Information and Security, Philadelphia, PA, 16-18 August 1988.

[34]	Johnson, H.L., and J. D. Layne, Modeling Security Risk in Networks, Proceedings 11th 
National Computer Security Conference, NIST and NCSC, October 17-20, 1988, pp. 59-
64.

[35]	Johnson, H.L., Use of the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) for 
Complex, Evolving, Multipolicy Systems, A technical report written for the NSA, Febru-
ary 1, 1993.

[36]	MIL-HDBK-245B, Preparation of Statements of Work.

[37]	MIL-STD-481, Configuration Control, Engineering Changes, Deviations and Waivers.

[38]	MIL-STD-483A, Configuration Management Practices for Systems, Equipment, Muni-
tions, and Computer Software.

[39]	MIL-STD-490A, Specification Practices.

[40]	MIL-STD-499, Engineering Management.

[41]	MIL-STD-499B, System Engineering.

[42]	MIL-STD-1521A, Technical Review and Audits for Systems, Equipments and Computer 
Programs, 1 June 1976, with Notice 1, 29 September 1978 and Notice 2, December 21, 
1981.

[43]	NCSC-TG-001, A Guide to Understanding Audit in Trusted Systems, June 1, 1988.

[44]	NCSC-TG-002, Version 2, Trusted Product Evaluation, A Guide for Vendors, April 29, 
1990.

[45]	NCSC-TG-003, A Guide to Understanding Discretionary Access Control (DAC) in Trust-
ed Systems, September 30, 1987.

[46]	NCSC-TG-004, Glossary of Computer Security Terms, October 21, 1988.

[47]	NCSC-TG-005, Trusted Network Interpretation (TNI) of the Trusted Computer System 
Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), July 31, 1987.

[48]	NCSC-TG-006, A Guide to Understanding Configuration Management in Trusted Sys-
tems, March 28, 1988.

[49]	NCSC-TG-007, A Guide to Understanding Design Documentation in Trusted Systems, 
October 2, 1988.

[50]	NCSC-TG-008, A Guide to Understanding Trusted Distribution in Trusted Systems, De-
cember 15, 1988.

[51]	NCSC-TG-009, Computer Security Subsystem Interpretation (CSSI) of the Trusted Com-
puter System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), September 16, 1988.

[52]	NCSC-TG-010, Version 1, A Guide to Understanding Security Modeling in Trusted Sys-
tems, October, 1992.

[53]	NCSC-TG-011, Trusted Network Interpretation Environments Guideline, 1 August,1990.

[54]	NCSC-TG-013, Rating Maintenance Phase, Program Document, June 23, 1989.

[55]	NCSC-TG-014, Guidelines for Formal Verification Systems, April 1, 1989.

[56]	NCSC-TG-015, A Guide to Understanding Trusted Facility Management, October 18, 
1989.

[57]	NCSC-TG-016, Version 1, Guidelines for Writing Trusted Facility Manuals, October, 
1992.

[58]	NCSC-TG-017, A Guide to Understanding Identification and Authentication in Trusted 
Systems, September 1, 1991.

[59]	NCSC-TG-018, A Guide to Understanding Object Reuse in Trusted Systems, July, 1992.

[60]	NCSC-TG-019, Trusted Product Evaluation Questionnaire, October 16, 1989.

[61]	NCSC-TG-021, Trusted Database Management System Interpretation of The Trusted 
Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), April 1991.

[62]	NCSC-TG-022, A Guide to Understanding Trusted Recovery in Trusted Systems, Decem-
ber 30, 1991.

[63]	NCSC-TG-024, Version 1:

·	Volume 1/4, A Guide to Procurement of Trusted Systems: An Introduction to Procure-
ment Initiators on Computer Security Requirements, Dec,1992.

·	Volume 2/4, A Guide to Procurement of Trusted Systems: Language for RFP Specifica-
tions and Statements of Work-An Aid to Procurement Initiators, 30 June 1993.

·	Volume 3/4, "A Guide to Procurement of Trusted Systems: Computer Security Contract 
Data Requirements List and Data Item Descriptions Tutorial," 28 February 1994.

·	Volume 4/4, "A Guide to Procurement of Trusted Systems: How to Evaluate a Bidder's 
Proposal Document-An Aid to Procurement Initiators and Contractors," (Draft).

[64]	NCSC-TG-025, A Guide to Understanding Data Remanence in Information Systems, 
September 1991.

[65]	NCSC-TG-026, A Guide to Writing the Security Features User's Guide for Trusted Sys-
tems, September 1991.

[66]	NCSC-TG-027, Information System Security Officer Guideline, June 1991.

[67]	NCSC-TG-028, Assessing Controlled Access Protection, May 25, 1992.

[68]	OMB Circular Number A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources, Appen-
dix III "Security of Federal Automated Information Systems," December 12, 1985.

[69]	Public Law 98-369, "Competition in Contracting Act of 1984."

[70]	Public Law 100-235, "Computer Security Act of 1987," January 8, 1988.

[71]	Standard Solicitation Document for Federal Information Processing (FIP) Systems 
(Hardware, Software and Maintenance), General Services Administration, June 30, 
1991.

[72]	Title 10, United States Code, Section 2318, "Advocates for Competition."

[73]	Title 41, United States Code, Section 418, "Advocates for Competition."


